John P. Stevens High School - Student-Parent Handbook 2023 - 2024  


Attention Parents!
IMPORTANT ATTENDANCE INFORMATION (Details on the attendance policy begins )
Attendance Office
IMPORTANT:  Parents must not contact the student via cell phone, call/text during school hours.

Student Pick Up for Early Dismissal
If your child must leave school early, please follow these guidelines:
1. Parent signs a note to be submitted to the Attendance Office by the student prior to homeroom.
2. Choose a time between classes to avoid disruption to classes.
3. When possible, inform student prior to early dismissal so that the student may report to the Attendance Office at the designated time.
IMPORTANT:  Partial day absences, even if due to a doctor’s appointment, may be considered unexcused by the Attendance policy.


About John P. Steven High School
Alma Mater
Hail, all hail, to John P. Stevens
Loud your name shall ring,
May all praises be upon you,
We your students sing.
May the brightness of your glory
Never, never fail,
May your spirit and your honor
Evermore prevail.
Come shining through, John P. Stevens
Hail to thee, all hail!


	Fight Song Chant
Stevens, Stevens
Lets Go Stevens
J. P. Stevens
Hawks Fly High
		School Colors
	Dartmouth Green & Old Gold
	School Mascot
	Hawk
	School Yearbook
	Regalis
	School Newspaper
	Hawkeye
	School Digital Newspaper
	JPS Weekly
	School Calendar
2023-2024
Public Schools of Edison Township
Mission Statement
The mission of the Public Schools of Edison Township is to ensure that all students achieve at the highest level of academic success. The district, in partnership with the community, will provide a safe, supportive learning environment that promotes self-worth and encourages productive contributions to a diverse and constantly evolving global society.


Board of Education


Mr. Jingwei “Jerry” Shi
	Mr. Mohin Patel
	Mr. Brian Rivera
	Joseph Romano
(Board Vice-President)
	Vishal Patel
	Mr. Biral Patel
	Ms. Virginia White
	Ms. Xiaohan "Shannon" Peng
(Board President)
	Douglas Schneider
	

District Administration
Dr. Edward Aldarelli Ed.D,  Superintendent
TBA, Chief Academic Officer/Secondary Administrator Grades 6 – 12
Ms. Baninder Mahabir, Chief Academic Officer/Elementary Administrator Grades Pre-K – 5
Dr. Thomas Toohey,  Assistant Superintendent for Pupil/Special Services
Mr. Jonathan Toth, Business Administrator/Board Secretary
Mr. Doug Covert, Acting Director of Human Resources
Mr. Patrick Kissane, Director of School Safety & Security


High School Administration
Mr. Meredith Quick, Principal                         
Mr. Ojas Ray, Assistant Principal                Mr. Robert Robinson, Assistant Principal
Ms. April Eyler, Assistant Principal                Ms. Fay Witkowski, Assistant Principal




Academic Supervisors
Mr. Brian Glassberg, 
School Counseling
	Ms. Elizabeth Lell, Mathematics
	Ms. Laurie Maier, 
Science
	Mr. Mark DiGiovacchino, 
Social Studies
	Mr. Jeffrey Dicocco, 
PE / Health
	Mr. Argiris Hristofis, 
Athletics / Intramurals
	Mr. Thomas White
Music and Visual Arts
	Ms. Harriet Sideris, 
English
	Mr. Nirav Lad, 
World Languages
	Ms. Kate Gousman,
Special Education
	Ms. Nicole Halpin,
21st Century Skills
	Dr. Frank Ruggiero
World Languages 6-12
	________________
 Be the Change JPS Telephone Directory
Phone: 732-452-2800  |  Fax: 732-452-2863  | Website: John P Stevens High School Website


PRINCIPAL                                                
Meredith Quick - Principal                                 452-2834                                                   
Madline LaRosa / Secretary                452-2815


ASSISTANT PRINCIPALS
Ojas Ray                                                         452-9344
Robert Robinson                                          452-2840
April Eyler                                             452-2837
Fay Witkowski                                452-2899


MAIN OFFICE SECRETARIES
Lori Lindquist                                452-2838
Nadia Mohammed                        452-2832
Premalatha Bysani                        452-2836


ATTENDANCE SECRETARY
Monica Mendez                                  452-2807                        
COUNSELING SECRETARIES
Lynda Androvich                        452-2810
Jessica Coreschi                                452-2811
Kim Shutz                                452-2812


SCHOOL COUNSELORS                     452-2811
Brian Glassberg / Supervisor                
Karen Cundari                   Christen DeSimone
Lisa Lin                               Elissa Rinaldi
Stephen Miller                  Maria Randazza
Melissa Zappia                  Hilal Yildiz
James Cardillo                   Shaheda Hall
Janine Silberberg              Susan Nadel
                
CHILD STUDY TEAM
Amy Bruno                                452-2816
Kate Rosenberg                                        452-2809
Karen O’Reilly                                              452-2868
Jennifer Amman / Secretary                      452-2852
	NURSES
Laura Crincoli                                452-2824
Joy Lehrer                                452-2895
Brooke Stevens                                452-2821


ATHLETICS
Argiris Hristofis / Athletic Supervisor              452-2843
Melissa Wojcik / Athletic Trainer                452-2844
Lindsey Miragliotta / Secretary                  452-2847
Boys Coaches Office                                452-2813
Girls Coaches Office                                          452-2827
        
SUPERVISORS
Harriet Sideris / English                               452-2850
Elizabeth Lell / Mathematics                452-2818
Laurie Maier / Science                        452-2842
Mark DiGiovacchino / Social Studies        452-2841
Jeffrey Dicocco / Health / PE                452-4936
Kate Gousman  / Special Education        452-2867
Nirav Lad / World Lang                                      452-2853
Thomas White/Visual Performing Arts     452-4933


MUSIC DEPARTMENT
Raymond Henricksen/ Instrumental        452-2808
Jonathan Meszaros / Choral                452-2817
Brian Verdi / Orchestra                        452-2882


LIBRARY
The school's librarian is Sheri Stein.                             452-2846
                                
SECURITY                                 452-2836
	Parent / Faculty Communication
The staff at J.P. Stevens High School values communication with parents/guardians as a key component to successfully educating our students.  The following avenues are open to parents/guardians to establish and maintain direct contact with their children’s teachers, counselors, etc.
E-mail:  All staff members can be reached via a district e-mail account.  The standard address format is firstname.lastname@edison.k12.nj.us
Teachers’ first and last names can be found on your child’s schedule, or on the school website John P Stevens High School Website.
Phone message: Parents/guardians may call the main office at (732) 452-2800 from 7:15 a.m. and 3:45 p.m. (Monday through Friday) and leave a message for any staff member.  In most cases, the staff member will return the call within 24 hours of receiving the message.
Parent Portal on GENESIS:  You can check on your child’s progress in his/her classes via the district’s secure online student information program.  Instructions for accessing and navigating the Parent Portal are available on the district’s website (www.edison.k12.nj.us) 
In person:  Attend Back-to-School Night or Parent Conference Night (see below), or arrange for an in-school conference with a teacher through your child’s school counselor.
Interim Reports/Report Cards:  These formal documents provide periodic updates on student progress, but should not replace the methods above as a means of communicating with your children’s teachers.  
BACK TO SCHOOL NIGHT
J. P. Stevens High School holds an annual “Back to School Night” in late September/early October.  “Back to School Night” presents parents with the opportunity to follow their son/daughter’s schedule and to meet the school staff and administration.  Additional information is mailed home in September.
PARENT-TEACHER CONFERENCE NIGHT
In early December, a Parent-Teacher Conference Night is scheduled to coincide with the distribution of the first marking period report card.  A notice is mailed home with information explaining the procedures for arranging the conferences which are designed to review students’ academic progress in classes where difficulties may be apparent.  However, parents are encouraged to speak with teachers at any time they feel a need arises.  This is best done via e-mail (addresses for all staff can be found on the school website), or through the school counselor or main office.  If necessary, an in-school conference will be planned.
PARENT PORTAL
Parent Portal gives parents/guardians information through the District website to their children's grades, assignments, attendance, and gives simplified email contact with teachers. To utilize the benefits of the Parent Portal parents/guardians must register.  Registration is available through the district website.
Parent Portal Link
________________


JPS Standard Bell Schedule


WARNING BELL
	7:35
	HOMEROOM
	7:40 - 7:45
	PERIOD 1
	7:50 - 8:32
	PERIOD 2
	8:37 - 9:19
	PERIOD 3
	9:24 - 10:06
	PERIOD 4        (1st lunch)
	10:11 - 10:35
	PERIOD 5
	10:40 - 10:53
	PERIOD 6      (2nd lunch)
	10:58 - 11:22
	PERIOD 7
	11:27 - 11:40
	PERIOD 8      (3rd lunch)
	11:45 - 12:09
	PERIOD 9
	12:14 - 12:27
	PERIOD 10    (4th lunch)
	12:32 - 12:56
	PERIOD 11
	1:01 - 1:43
	PERIOD 12
	1:48 - 2:30
	







JPS Single Session Bell Schedule


WARNING BELL
	7:35
	HOMEROOM
	7:40 - 7:45
	PERIOD 1
	7:50 - 8:17
	PERIOD 2
	8:22 - 8:49
	PERIOD 3
	8:54 - 9:21
	PERIOD 4 / 5 or 5 / 6
	9:26 - 9:53
	PERIOD 6 / 7 or 7 / 8
	9:58 - 10:25
	PERIOD 8 / 9 or 9 / 10
	10:30 - 10:57
	PERIOD 11
	11:02 - 11:28
	PERIOD 12
	11:33 - 12:00
	

________________


JPS Delayed Opening Bell Schedule


HOMEROOM
	9:30 - 9:35
	PERIOD 1
	9:49 - 10:07
	PERIOD 2
	10:11 - 10:38
	PERIOD 3
	10:43 - 11:10
	PERIOD 4        (1st lunch)
	11:15 - 11:36
	(Note: 4 Minute passing between periods 4 and 5)
	PERIOD 5
	11:40 - 11:46
	PERIOD 6      (2nd lunch)
	11:51 - 12:12
	PERIOD 7
	12:17 - 12:23
	PERIOD 8      (3rd lunch)
	12:28 - 12:49
	PERIOD 9
	12:54 - 1:00
	PERIOD 10    (4th lunch)
	1:05 - 1:26
	PERIOD 11
	1:31 - 1:58
	PERIOD 12
	2:03 - 2:30
	________________


DELAYED OPENING PROCEDURES


1. A delayed opening will result in school hours being 9:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. with a special bell schedule adjusted so that all classes will meet for approximately 27 minutes each.  Lunches are 21 minutes. 
2. The school day begins at 9:30 a.m. with homeroom.  Students who are late to school must sign in at the Attendance Office and will be charged with a tardy.  Students absent all day will be charged with a full-day absence.
Note: In case of a school bus problem, students will be excused from being absent or tardy. It is still necessary for them to report to the attendance office.
3. Students arriving before 9:00 a.m. must remain in the auditorium for supervision.  There can be no loitering in other areas of the building or on school grounds. 
4. LUNCHES will be served; however, the menu will be adjusted to accommodate the short interval periods used to prepare the food.   
5. EARLY-RELEASE SENIORS must attend all their classes and may only dismiss after their last class, even if it is later than their normal clock time.  Seniors should make arrangements with their employers to arrive late for work.  Special cases should be brought to the attention of the Administration.
6. Students who attend SHARED-TIME VOCATIONAL SCHOOL will be advised of their status by the Child Study Team.
7. STUDENT ACTIVITIES will depend on the weather conditions after school and in the evening.  PA announcements will be used to clarify these matters.
8. TRANSPORTATION – School buses will pick up an hour and a half later than scheduled; e.g., a 7:15 a.m. pick-up will move to 8:45 a.m.
9. Notice of school closing or delayed opening due to inclement weather or other reason will be reported through the Connect-Ed telephone system and is announced on radio stations WCTC 1450 and WERA 1590, and television Channel 118 starting 6:00 a.m. and posted on the website.  Cancellations of a delayed opening may be made until 8:00 a.m.




AFFIRMATIVE ACTION / EQUAL ACCESS


        The Public Schools of Edison Township practice non-discrimination in educational programs and procedures.  The Board of Education provides a full range of educational offerings, including appropriate vocational programs, to students regardless of race, creed, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, or handicapping condition.
        Any inquiries regarding compliance or grievances may be directed to the Affirmative Action Officer or 504 Coordinator.  A grievance is a complaint regarding equal access or affirmative action based upon discrimination or harassment due to an individual’s race, creed, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, or handicapping condition.
        Any individual who has been subjected to harassment or discrimination or who has witnessed any incident of such harassment or discrimination should report the matter without delay to the School Affirmative Action Officer.


District Affirmative Action Officer
	TBD
Asst. Superintendent
732-452-2815


	School Affirmative Action Officer
	Ms. Meredith Quick
Principal
732-452-2834


	504 Coordinator
	Mr. Brian Glassberg
Supervisor of Counseling 
732-452-2829


	________________


PUPIL RECORDS
Records shall be collected and maintained for each pupil from the date of enrollment through the date of withdrawal or graduation.  These records are maintained to provide accurate information for those with a legitimate interest and concern in the pupil’s education and welfare.
The collection, access, dissemination, and maintenance of pupil records shall be in accordance with Federal and State Laws and the NJ Administrative Code – Title 6, Subtitle A, Chapter 3, Subchapter 6:  Pupil Records.  Parents may request a complete copy of Board Policy 5125 Pupil Records through the Principal.
The Board of Education designates the following student information as information that may be included in a student information directory and otherwise made available to the public according to NJAC 6:3-6.1 et seq.:
The student’s name, address, telephone number, grade level, date, and place of birth, dates of attendance, major field of study, participation in officially recognized activities, weight and height relating to athletic team membership, degrees, awards and the most recent educational agency attended by the pupil.
A parent or adult pupil must submit a written statement to the chief school administrator prohibiting the institution from including any or all types of information about the student in any student information directory or otherwise making such information available to the public before allowing access to such directory, information, and school facilities to education, occupational and military recruiters according to NJSA 18A:36-19.1 or members of the public.
Pupil records maintained in the Edison Township Schools include the following:
1. REGULAR SCHOOL PUPIL RECORDS 
1. Mandated Records
1. Cumulative Record Card
2. Cumulative Health Record Card
2. Permitted Records
1. Accident report
2. Consent forms
3. Standardized test record form
3. The following pupil records are normally retained for a period of one full year but may be retained for a longer period if determined by the principal or designee to be relevant to the education of the pupil.
1. Check-out sheet
2. Progress Report
3. Correspondence, memos, reports, referrals, etc.
4. Anecdotal records
5. Home instruction information report
6. Parent conference report
4. The following pupil records are retained until graduation or one year after withdrawal or transfer unless otherwise noted.
1. End-of-year secondary report card
2. Reading specialist report
3. Enrollment form
4. Individual test profile chart
5. Academic records from summer school/out-of-district
6. Pupil transfer card
7. Elementary report card (grades K-5)
2. SPECIAL SERVICES RECORD
1. Mandated Records (for classified pupil)
1. Psychological evaluation
2. Educational evaluation
3. Social assessment
4. Health history
5. Medical report
6. Individualized education program
7. Individual speech therapy plan
8. Classification memo
9. Parent conference/classification notice
2. Permitted Records
1. Parent notice of referral
2. Referral
3. Out-of-district placement of classified pupil
4. Conference memos
5. Case memos
6. Social worker-parent
7. Educationally relevant information
8. Supplemental instruction approval
9. Reports from other districts and agencies
10. Correspondence
11. Access to records forms
3. Maintenance and Destruction of Special Services Records
Special Services records for pupils classified MRT and MRE will be kept for a period of ten years following graduation or withdrawal.  Records for pupils in all other classification categories will be kept for a period of five years following graduation or withdrawal.  Upon graduation or withdrawal, a copy of mandated Special Services records will be provided with written notice that the records will be destroyed after the five-year period.
Special Services records for pupils who have not been classified will be destroyed upon graduation or withdrawal unless there is written direction from the parent or adult pupil to maintain such records.
________________


PROCEDURE FOR ACCESS TO PUPIL RECORDS
Only the following authorized organizations, agencies, and persons shall have access to pupil records.  
1. The parent(s), legal guardian(s), foster parent(s) or parent surrogate(s).
2. Pupils at least 16 years of age who are terminating their education in the district.
3. The adult pupil and the pupil’s parent(s) or guardian(s) who have written permission of such pupil.
4. A non-adult pupil may have access only through his/her parents.
5. The parent or adult pupil shall either have access to or be specifically informed about only that portion of another pupil’s record that contains information about his/her child or himself/herself.
6. Certified school district personnel who have assigned education responsibility.
7. A district board of education to fulfill its legal responsibilities.
8. Secretarial and clerical personnel, under the direct supervision of certified school personnel.
9. Officials of other district boards of education and private agencies which provide educational services through public funds.
10. Mandated pupil records shall be forwarded to the chief school administrator of the receiving district within 10 days after the transfer has been verified by the requesting school district.
11. Officers and employees of a state agency responsible for protective services to children who are engaged in the investigation (pursuant to NJSA 9:6-8.40).
12. The Commissioner of Education who has assigned responsibility that necessitates the review of such records.
13. Accrediting organizations in order to carry out their accrediting functions.
14. Organizations, agencies, and persons from outside the school if they have written consent of parent or adult pupil.
15. Educational, occupational, and military recruiters (pursuant to NJSA 18A:36-19.1) provided that any parent or adult pupil may request, by writing to the chief school administrator, to be excused from participating in recruitment programs or having their name appear in student information directories for recruitment purposes.  
16. Organizations, agencies, and individuals outside the school other than those specified in this rule upon presentation of a court order.
17. Bona fide researchers who explain the nature of the research project in writing.
Access to pupil records by authorized persons (preceding) shall be granted subject to the following conditions:   
1. When a request for access to pupil records is received by a school administrator, an appointment for viewing the records will be made within ten days.
2. Authorized organizations, agencies, or persons from outside the school whose access requires the consent of a parent or adult pupil must submit their written request to view the records, together with any required authorization, to the school's principal.  A request to view special services records must be submitted in writing to the Assistant Superintendent for Special Services.
3. The school's principal or designee shall be present during the inspection period to provide interpretation of the records and to prevent their alteration.
4. The district board of education shall, before the disclosure of any pupil records to organizations, agencies, or persons outside the school district pursuant to a court order, give the parents or adult pupil at least three days’ notice.
5. A record may be withheld from a parent or a pupil under 18 or from an adult pupil only when the district board of education obtains a court order or is provided with evidence that there is a court order revoking the right to access.
6. Pupil records are subject to challenge by parent and adult pupil.
If there is a request to reproduce a record, the charge will be as follows: 
                        1-10 copies        50 cents per page
                        11-20 copies        25 cents per page
                        21+ copies        10 cents per page 
________________


GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
PUBLIC
Any request, suggestion, or complaint in reference to the staff, curriculum (other than instructional materials), transportation, physical plant, grounds, administration, students, or any other matter shall be handled as follows:
1. Any such matter shall first be discussed with or communicated to the staff member most directly involved.  The staff member so addressed shall act promptly to respond to such communication.
2. If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved at the first level, the person originating it shall proceed to the next higher authority.
3. If a satisfactory resolution cannot be achieved at the second level, the person shall submit a written request to the Superintendent for a conference in which is detailed:
1. The specific nature of the matter to be discussed and the steps already undertaken to resolve it;
2. The relief desired and the supporting reasons.
4. Should the matter remain unresolved following a hearing by the Superintendent, the person may, in writing, request a hearing before the Board.  The request must include sufficient detail to permit a full understanding of the issue.  Should such a hearing be granted, the Board shall require from the Superintendent copies of the written material in the case and attendance of the person requesting the hearing.
The Board of Education is, by law, charged with the responsibility of approving instructional materials purchased. In discharging this responsibility, the Board recognizes the students’ right to free access to many different types of materials.  The board also recognizes the right of teachers and administrators to select books and other materials in accordance with current trends in education and to make these items available in the schools.
The Board of Education recognizes that opinions differ concerning the appropriateness of instructional materials. Occasionally, an individual or group may find instructional material used in schools conflicting with their views. Any request, suggestion, or complaint about instructional materials should be initiated, processed, and considered as stated in Board of Education procedure #6161.2.
The parent/guardian, moreover, has the right to decide whether or not his/her child shall read a particular supplementary book or use other instructional materials. No parent/guardian, however, has the right to prescribe the reading matter or instructional material used for students other than his/her own child/children. 
The Superintendent shall establish procedures for handling such complaints about instructional materials (see procedure #6161.2).
“Instructional materials” means any library item or item used to teach students, including, but not limited to, the following:  book, periodical, pamphlet, video, DVD, computer software, workbook, audio CD, and website.


PUPILS


The Edison Township Board of Education recognizes that there must be an open line of communication between pupils and school authorities so that pupil grievances may be fairly heard, considered, and resolved.


The Board, therefore, adopts as policy the following pupil grievance procedure:


1. The pupil or pupils shall first present the grievance to the teacher concerned for discussion and resolution;


2. If the matter is not resolved in the discussion with the teacher concerned or the grievance is not within the province of the teacher, the grievance shall be presented to the principal by the concerned pupils or their representative for his/her consideration and disposition;


3. If the grievance is not resolved through the discussion with the principal, the grievance shall be presented in writing to the Superintendent for his/her consideration and disposition;


4. If a resolution is not obtained at this level, there remains the avenue of a written appeal to the Board of Education.


When a grievance proceeds to the Board, the Board shall render its decision promptly but in no more than 14 calendar days.  If the student so wishes and if the issue properly falls within his/her jurisdiction, the grievance may be appealed to the Commissioner of Education.


The Board or its employees will hear the complaints and grievances of the students of this district, provided that such complaints and grievances are made according to established procedures.


The grievance shall be submitted in writing via an established form or signed letter formally describing the grievance to the building principal, the Superintendent, and the Board, in turn, with a suitable period of time allowed at each level for the hearing of the grievance and the preparation of a response.


At each step, the school authority hearing the grievances may call in the student’s parent/guardian, provided that the student is not 18 years of age or older.  The student may conduct the grievance procedure with the help of a parent/guardian at any step.


This school district at no time will tolerate pupil disorders stemming from grievances that would jeopardize the safety of other pupils and personnel.
VISITORS
Potential visitors, such as graduates, former students, friends, or relatives of current students, who wish to come into school for the day or part of the day are not permitted.  Any exceptions must be arranged through the Administration. ALL VISITORS TO THE BUILDING MUST SIGN IN WITH SECURITY/SECRETARY IN THE MAIN LOBBY. Anyone who does not have official business with the school will be required to leave the premises immediately; a police complaint for trespassing may be filed.
GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
Attendance:  Students must fulfill all attendance requirements established by the Board of Education.
State Requirements (current requirements as of Aug 2021):  For the classes of 2024 - 2027 students MAY have to demonstrate proficiency in both ELA and math by meeting ONE of the criteria in each column below. Decisions for these classes have not been made by the state:
  

The NJDOE has not yet made a determination for the graduation requirements for the class of 2024, 2025, 2026. Class of 2023 is exempt.
Maximum Subjects Permitted:  Students will be permitted to take a maximum of seven (7) subjects per semester/year.  Students enrolled in two (2) lab science courses will be limited to six (6) subjects.  The eighth subject in each student's daily schedule will be a study period.  (Note: All science lab periods will be scheduled during the study period.)
At the discretion of the high school principal, for seniors MAY be permitted the option of taking a course in lieu of a study hall depending on his/her overall GPA and the availability of classroom openings.  Seniors selecting this option would be permitted to take his/her science lab one day a week during Physical Education/Health period.  Seniors taking two lab science courses must take one study hall.  This may provide an exception to the six (6) subject limit for seniors who are enrolled in two lab courses. 










Required Courses:  The following courses are required and must be successfully completed before students are awarded their diploma.


English
	4 Years/20 credits
	Mathematics
     (including Algebra 1 or content area equivalent)
     (including Geometry or content area equivalent)
	4 Years/20 credits
	Science (including Biology or content area equivalent)
	3 Years/15 credits
	World History
	1 Year/ 5 credits
	US History
	2 Years/10 credits
	World Language
	2 Years/10 credits
	Physical Education/Health/Driver Education – Grade 10
	4 Years/20 Credits
	Career Education and Consumer, Family, and Life Skills*
	5 Credits
	Visual and Performing Arts**
	5 Credits
	Advanced Courses/Electives
     (Economics/Financial Literacy - 2.5 Credits)
	20 Credits
	Credits
	130
	* CAREER EDUCATION AND CONSUMER, FAMILY, and LIFE SKILLS:  All courses in Family and Consumer Science, Business, Computer Science, and Industrial Arts/Technology.  The Academy SLE Course of Civics and Justice (when taken as an elective) also satisfies the requirement. Note: Financial Literacy Courses do not satisfy this requirement.
** VISUAL AND PERFORMING ARTS: All courses in Music and Visual Arts, Theater Arts, and Speech Arts.
SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF REQUIRED COURSES


        Required courses that are failed must be repeated in summer school or the following year and must be successfully completed before the next course can be taken in a certain subject area’s required sequence.  Students who fail to do this jeopardize their chances of graduating with their class.  (This applies to English, math, science, and world languages).  In some instances, the attendance policy requires students to repeat courses only during the school year, not through summer school.  EXCEPTIONS TO THIS PROCEDURE ARE TYPICALLY CONSIDERED FOR THE SENIOR YEAR ONLY AND MUST BE APPROVED BY THE PRINCIPAL.
SPECIAL EDUCATION GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS
        In accordance with the stipulations and provisions of the New Jersey Administrative Code, special education students must successfully complete all state and local high school graduation requirements to receive the state-endorsed high school diploma.  Any and all exemptions must be specified in the Individual Education Program (IEP) and must be approved, in writing, by the Superintendent or his designee.


        Criteria for determining exemptions from any and/or all state and local high school graduation requirements/curriculum proficiencies shall be as follows:
“The district, through the IEP process and pursuant to N.J.A.C. 6A:14-4.11 - Graduation, may, for individual pupils with disabilities as defined in N.J.A.C. 6A:14-1.3, specify alternate requirements for a State-endorsed diploma.” (Edison BOE Policy 5460 (B)1)
        The IEP must include a rationale for all exemptions and reasons why the goals and objectives (of the IEP) do not include the proficiencies.  Moreover, alternate proficiencies shall be included in the IEP as replacements for those state and/or local proficiencies that have been exempted.




GRADING
        Students shall be graded based on their achievement in the program(s) approved by the board.  Achievement must be measurable and documented.  They shall be given the opportunity to progress through the educational program at their level of ability.  All factors pertinent to achievement shall be considered when assigning grades.  The results of standardized tests shall not be used to determine student grades.
The secondary grading scale for report cards shall be as follows:


GRADE
	PROFICIENCY RANK
	NUMERICAL VALUE
	A+
A
A-
	 
Outstanding
	97-100
93-96
90-92
	B+
B
B-
	 
Good
	87-89
83-86
80-82
	C+
C
C-
	 
Satisfactory
	77-79
73-76
70-72
	D
	Poor
	65-69
	F
	Unsatisfactory
	0-64
	

	

 
	 I
	Incomplete
	 
	 WP
	Withdrawn Passing
	 
	 WF
	Withdrawn Failing
	 
	 NG
 P
	No Grade     
Transfer student, credit for port-of-entry ELL, no GPA credit, based on principal permission
	 
	 
	 
	

	







Non-Exam Courses
For purposes of computing the final course grade only, the letter grade for each marking
period shall be converted to the following numerical equivalents (Ten (10) point grading
system):
A+ = 10        B+ = 7                C+ = 4                D = 1
A   =   9        B    = 6        C   = 3
A– =   8        B–  = 5        C– = 2                F = 0


A total numerical score for each subject shall be computed by converting the letter grade for each marking period to the numerical equivalent:
Example:                                           --Marking Periods--                  Total Numerical
                                                1st        2nd        3rd        4th                      Score
                Letter Grade                         A-          C+         C         B-           
                Numerical Equivalent                  8         4          3          5                     20                


This total numerical score shall be divided by 4 (since there are four (4) marking periods) to determine the average numerical score (20÷4=5).  The average numerical score shall be converted to the appropriate letter grade (5= B-), and this grade shall constitute the final grade for the subject.


Average numerical scores that consist of fractional values of less than one-half shall be dropped.  Average numerical scores that consist of fractional values of 1.5 or above shall be converted to the higher whole number.  (Example 1.5→2 = C–)


The minimum average numerical score needed to pass a course is 1.0.  There shall be no converting to the higher whole number for a numerical score below 1.0. 
(Example 0.75→0 = F)


Incompletes
When course requirements during a marking period have not been completed to the
teacher's satisfaction, an incomplete (I) grade may be issued.  The teacher shall
communicate the student’s lack of progress to the student, parent, and guidance
counselor.  
 
If an incomplete (I) is warranted for marking periods 1, 2, and/or 3, an incomplete (I) shall
be issued for that marking period.  Zeroes for work not completed will be averaged with
already recorded grades by the end of the next marking period.  An incomplete (I) may
be given for marking periods 1, 2, or 3 as approved by the principal/department
supervisor.


Incomplete (I) Grade Marking Period 4
No credit will be earned for the course when a student does not complete the
major assignments required for the 4th marking period or end of the course if a semester,
quarter, or trimester.  The grade will be recorded as an incomplete (I) pending the
student’s attendance at summer school.  Credit will be earned for the course upon successfully completing summer school.  The summer school grade will be utilized for
the fourth quarter grade.  Failure to complete the course requirements successfully in
summer school will result in a failing grade for the course.  An incomplete (I) may be
given for the fourth marking period or end of the course if approved by the department
supervisor.


Incomplete (I) for Marking Period 4 – Final Course Grade
An incomplete (I) may be given for the final course grade as approved by the principal for
the following reasons only:  medical condition documented by a physician, loss of an
immediate family member or the event of a family crisis.  The incomplete must be
resolved prior to September 15th.


Appeals Procedure
When parents/guardians or adult students are not satisfied with grades issued for a
Specific marking period or an entire semester/year (final grades), an appeal can be
filed in the following manner:
1. A written appeal must be presented to the principal/designee by the parent/guardian or adult student within 14 calendar days following receipt of notification of marking period or final grades.  The principal/designee will act appropriately and rule on the appeal within 30 calendar days.   
2. Appeals by the parent/guardian/adult student or by the teacher regarding the decision of the principal/designee must be submitted in writing to the superintendent of schools within 14 calendar days following notification of the principal/designee's decision.  The superintendent will take appropriate action and decide within 30 calendar days.
3. Appeals to the board by the parent/guardian/adult student or by the teacher regarding the decision of the superintendent must be submitted in writing within 14 calendar days following notification of the superintendent's decision.  The board will render a decision within 30 calendar days.
4. Board of Education decisions may be appealed to the commissioner of education.

Common Quarterly Assessments will be administered in the following courses at all instructional levels:


English
	I, II, III, IV, including AP Lang and AP Lit
	Science
	Environmental Science, Biology, Chemistry, Physics
	Math
	Algebra 1, Geometry, Algebra 2, Pre-Calculus, Calculus, Statistics, Integrated Math A and B, 
	Social Studies
	US History 1 and 2, World History
	

The Common Quarterly Assessments will be developed by committees of teachers under the supervision of the content supervisor.  They will be designed to take one class period and administered as part of the normal school day.  The assessments will be based on standards and/or content studied during the single marking period.
 
The Quarterly Assessments will be graded as any other test and will be 10% of each marking period grade.  Since students in the same course all take the same Quarterly Assessment, the grading standards should also be the same.  The content supervisors will assure consistency among their teachers.
 
Students on Home Instruction will be required to take examinations and follow the schedule as per board policy and as directed by the building principal/designee.
 
Since the quarterlies are part of each marking period, there are NO Senior exemptions.


HOME INSTRUCTION
Parents are requested to contact the School Counseling Office in order to apply for home instruction. A parental note and a doctor’s certificate indicating that the student will be unable to attend school due to illness or other good cause for a period of at least ten (10) school days must be presented. The doctor’s certificate must clearly delineate the reason and the duration of time the student will be unable to attend school. If approved by the district, the counselor will set up a home instruction schedule.


PHYSICAL EDUCATION


The Physical Education Program is scheduled as a marking period course combined with Health Education. All students must be enrolled in Health/Physical Education every year of enrollment as required for graduation by the State and Board Policy. The Health class is one marking period (Driver Education in 10th grade), and the Physical Education class is three marking periods. This Physical Education component will consist of Team Sports (Basketball, Softball, Volleyball, Ultimate Frisbee, Speedball, etc.), Individual Sports (Weight Training, Tennis, Golf, Badminton, Recreational Games, etc.), and Physical Fitness (Cardio – Vascular Development, Strength, Flexibility, etc.).


EVALUATION PROCESS
Students in Physical Education will be evaluated based on 4 criteria: Participation, Performance, Preparation, and Written Assignments/Tests.
Participation (40%) - 100 points 
*MAXIMUM -10 per day – teacher discretion on + points
-5        Unprepared for class (does not have sneakers) 
-10        Did not participate / Refuses to participate 
-5        Not actively involved in warm-ups (pre-class activities)
-5        Does not cooperate or follow directions
-5        Does not play by the rules/Displays poor sportsmanship
-5        Does not apply the skills of the activity
-5        Shows disrespect for classmates/team concept
-5        Frequent use of profanity
-5         Does not follow safety protocols


+5         Assists with equipment, scorekeeping, officiating, etc. 
+5        Improvement in skills or Fitness assessments
+5        Improvement in any other area or assessment



Performance (40%) - 100 points
*MAXIMUM -10 per day – teacher discretion on plus points
-5        Unprepared for class (does not have sneakers)
-5        Poor effort/Does not work to potential
-5        Does not apply skills during game play
-5        Uses improper terminology, tactics, and strategies
-5        Displays poor attitude and disposition


+5         Assists with equipment, scorekeeping, officiating, etc. 
+5        Improvement in skills or Fitness assessments
+5        Improvement in any other area or assessment
Preparation (20%) – 100 points
*AUTOMATIC FAILURE ON 4 UNPREPARED
-10        Unprepared for class (does not have sneakers)
-5        Wearing jewelry that creates safety hazard 
-5        Chewing gum 
-5        Tardy to class

PE Dress Code – Although a change of clothes is still recommended, clothing worn to school that is PE acceptable will be permitted to be worn for PE class.  Any student that does not wear PE acceptable clothes is considered unprepared for PE class and cannot participate. 
   * The attire should be safe, clean and appropriate for all activities.
   * Sweatshirts, sweatpants, T- shirts with sleeves and gym/basketball shorts that match the school dress code are acceptable – clothing with zippers and belt loops, including jeans and cargo shorts, are not acceptable.
   * “Soffe” style shorts are not an appropriate length for PE activities.
   * All logos and sayings must be appropriate for school.
   * Socks and appropriate sneakers must be worn for all activities – platform or clog sneakers (without backs) are not permitted, and sneakers must be tied at all times.
PE Jewelry Policy – For health/safety reasons, the district policy states that no jewelry, including religious jewelry, may be worn during PE class.  There are only two exceptions:  
   * medical identification bracelets/anklets (must be covered with soft, elastic cloth or tape
   * stud earrings—ONLY studs and ONLY in the ear (although we advise to remove them) 
Hoop/Dangling earrings, necklaces, bracelets, and all other body piercings (see below) are not acceptable for PE class.  PE teachers will not secure student jewelry, and the school district is not responsible for injury due to wearing stud earrings, or for lost, stolen or misplaced jewelry.  Students who do not remove unacceptable jewelry cannot participate and are considered unprepared for PE class. 
Body Piercing – Students cannot participate in PE class with body piercing jewelry.  It is recommended that students not have body piercing done when assigned to PE class – these things should be done during the Health cycle, or during vacations, summers, etc.  However, if a doctor’s note substantiates in advance the need for a medical PE excuse due to body piercing, only up to 5 days will be excused.  Only one 5-day exemption per year is allowed.


MEDICALS
Students may be excused from PE class for medical reasons according to the following guidelines:
   * Parent Note – A parental note may be accepted by the PE teacher for a one day excuse only, but the student must still get changed for Physical Education class.
   * Nurse – In order to go to the nurse, a student must be prepared for PE (dressed) and given a pass by the PE teacher. The nurse and teacher will determine if the student will be excused.
   * Doctor’s Notes – Students must have a doctor’s note for an extended excuse. Students with a doctor’s note do not change for PE. The PE teacher must sign the note before you go to the nurse for verification and approval. The doctor’s note must indicate the diagnosis, and specify the length of time for the excuse (a note indicating “Until Further Notice” will only be good for a maximum of 30 days, and must be followed up with thereafter). Up to 5 days excused, the student can remain in the PE class – over 5 days, they will be assigned a study hall.
   * NOTE: Students medically excused from PE will not be permitted to participate in any school sport until clearance to resume participation in PE is received.
   * Written Medical Curriculum – beginning on the 16th day of a medical excuse, students will be assigned written work by their teacher. All communication and completion of the assignments is the student’s responsibility.
INTERIM REPORTS
Each marking period is approximately forty-five (45) days.  At the midpoint of each marking period, interim progress reports will be available on Parent Portal to parents/guardians whose children are experiencing difficulty in their classes.
REPORT CARDS
Marking Period Grades cards will be available on the Parent Portal at the conclusion of each marking period (45 days). The number of total days a student is absent from each class and overall from school will also be available on Parent Portal.


HONOR ROLL
Students who earn all A’s for a marking period will be recognized as making the High Honor Roll.  Students with all B’s or a combination of A’s and B’s will be listed on the Regular Honor Roll. Students with any Incomplete are not eligible for the honor roll until the Incomplete is satisfied.
CLASS RANK
No information regarding rank in class shall be released or made public except as follows upon request.  Such requests shall be made through the supervisor of guidance.  Only the supervisor of guidance shall have access to rank in class information.
   1. The National Merit Scholarship Program shall be provided rank in class for those students it identifies as eligible for scholarship consideration.
   2. The New Jersey State Department of Education shall be provided with a list of students who may be eligible for Bloustein or other state scholarship awards.
   3. The United States Military Service Academies shall be provided rank in class if requested by an academy.
   4. Scholarship and/or specialized programs to which a student has applied shall be provided rank in class if such data is requested by the specific program.
GRADE POINT AVERAGE
Class rank shall be determined on the basis of the quality points earned in all subjects, 9th through 12th grades during academic school year (Sept – June).  Total quality points earned shall determine class rank and quality points shall be assigned as follows:


	Letter Grade
	Honors
	Accelerated
	Regular/Remedial
	

	

	A+
	6.33
	5.33
	4.33
	

	

	A
	6.00
	5.00
	4.00
	

	

	A–
	5.67
	4.67
	3.67
	

	

	B+
	5.33
	4.33
	3.33
	

	

	B
	5.00
	4.00
	3.00
	

	

	B–
	4.67
	3.67
	2.67
	

	

	C+
	4.33
	3.33
	2.33
	

	

	C
	4.00
	3.00
	2.00
	

	

	C–
	3.67
	2.67
	1.67
	

	

	D
	1.00
	1.00
	1.00
	

	

	F   
	0
	0
	0
	

	The quality points are multiplied by the number of credits received for each course. The quality points are then totaled and divided by the total number of credits attempted


The weighted grade point average shall be listed on the student transcript as an aid to colleges, business and technical schools as well as prospective employees.
Class rank shall be computed at the end of the sixth semester.  It may be computed in order to determine valedictorian/salutatorian at the end of the seventh semester.
Students who have taken all of their high school courses in Edison and/or in other high schools in New Jersey (public, parochial, private) will be ranked with their graduating class at Edison or J.P. Stevens High Schools.
Students from outside New Jersey transferring to Edison Public Schools following the first marking period of the junior year will NOT be ranked with their graduating class at Edison or J.P. Stevens High Schools.  In such cases, the transcript will include information pertaining to courses taken at the previous high school(s) at the time of transfer.  Additionally, all high school courses taken in Edison Public Schools will be entered on the transcript.
________________
SCHOOL PROFILE / WEIGHTED GPA DISTRIBUTION CHART
The School Profile shall include a distribution chart (see sample below) that provides an analysis and breakdown of the weighted GPA’s earned by a class. It provides the colleges with information on percentage and number of students in the class who have achieved a particular GPA (for example, all with 4.0 or better).


  



CHEATING INCIDENTS 


The Board has adopted the following policy and procedures for dealing with cheating at the high-school level in the following areas:  
   1. Homework
   2. Quizzes, labs, tests and major papers
   3. Midterm performance assessment and final examinations
   4. Standardized tests
   5. Stolen quizzes, tests and teacher manuals
   6. Plagiarism


NOTE:  PLAGIARISM, the act of taking and using the thoughts, writings, etc. of another person as one’s own, is a type of cheating and is punishable as such.


CONSEQUENCES OF CHEATING


   1. For any occurrence of cheating on homework, the student will receive "0" for the assignment.
   2. For occurrences of cheating on quizzes, labs, tests and major papers, the teacher will document the incident and report it to the department supervisor.  The supervisor will maintain a file of documented occurrences and the following procedures will be implemented.
   1. For the first offense, the student will receive "0" for the assignment/test and have a conference with the guidance counselor; the parent/guardian will be called by the teacher and receive a letter from the principal/designee.
   2. For the second offense, the student will receive "0" for the assignment/test.  The parent/guardian will be called by the teacher and receive a letter from the principal/designee.  In addition, the student will meet in a joint conference with the parent/guardian, the guidance counselor and the principal/designee.
   3. For the third offense, the student will receive "0" for the assignment/test. The parent/guardian will be called by the teacher and receive a letter from the principal/designee.  In addition, the student will meet in a joint conference with the parent/guardian, the guidance counselor and the principal/designee.  In addition, the student will be suspended from all co-curricular activities, including sports, for ninety (90) school days.
   4. For any additional offense, the student will be recommended to the superintendent for additional disciplinary action.  The parent/guardian will be called by the teacher and receive a letter from the principal/designee.  In addition, the student will be suspended from all co-curricular activities for ninety (90) school days.
   3. For occurrences of cheating on a final exam/performance assessment, the student will receive "0" for that exam and the incident will count as one cheating offense in terms of the provisions outlined in section 2, above.
   4. For occurrences of cheating on a standardized test, the results will be voided. The incident will count as one cheating offense in terms of the provisions outlined in section 2, above.
   5. For occurrences that involve the stealing of a quiz, test or teacher's manual, the student, or students, will be withdrawn from class and receive a grade of "with-drawn-failed" (WF).  In addition, the student(s) will be suspended from all co-curricular activities for ninety (90) school days.  Moreover, the student(s) may be subject to suspension or expulsion from school.


HAWKS HONOR CODE
Honor Academic Integrity Work Ethic Knowledge Sportsmanship


Mission – The JPS teachers and administrators understand that there are pressures that sometimes create an incentive to cheat. However, we firmly believe that cheating devalues education, damages the ethical character of the individual student and undermines the integrity of our school community. Cheating on quizzes, labs, tests, and major papers will result in the removal from student government as well as honor societies at large. The J. P. Stevens HAWKS Honor Code affirms the value of learning for its own sake, and the expectation of personal integrity and intellectual honesty in all academic work, student performance, and co-curricular activities. 
________________
  
  


  





SCHOOL COUNSELING DEPARTMENT


The role of the counseling program is to assist students in reaching their maximum potential.  Adolescence and growing up are important times of life. During this period of development, school counselors will assist each student to become a self-reliant, confident, mature, and productive person.  Through individual and group counseling, students are assisted in learning about themselves and in developing decision-making skills. To help students achieve these goals, counselors attempt to provide them with whatever help they need to achieve the goal of personal happiness and success.
J. P. Stevens High School will house approximately 2500 students this year. Students will be assigned to a counselor for the entire four years. In this way the student and counselor will get to know each other, develop confidence, and work their way through any problems or situations that might develop. Presently, counselors operate with an average counselee load of close to 300 students.
Counselors visit homerooms, meet with small groups, and meet with individual students. Occasionally, problems come up about course selections, possible future career plans, personal concerns, and social conflicts.  Counselors attempt to make themselves aware of such concerns and work diligently to help meet particular needs.  The counselors are concerned about students as individuals and desire to encourage their development.
The major thrust of the counseling program is to assist students in coming to a fuller understanding and knowledge of themselves.  With a more complete understanding of decisions and actions, they are better able to choose and formulate personal decisions.  In this way, they will be better able to lead a fuller, more satisfying life and strive to attain their full potential both as academic students and as individuals.


COUNSELING TELEPHONE NUMBER – 732-452-2811        
Office Hours 7:30 – 4:00                




                                
COUNSELING SERVICES
   1. School Orientation – attending a new school is an adjustment process. Counselors and students aid in making this adjustment a positive experience.
   2. Academic Planning – students, parents, teachers, and counselors all work together to provide the right school program for each students.
   3. Career Planning – students are encouraged to take a variety of courses based on their career interests.
   4. Individual Counseling – for personal, educational, career and school concerns, counselors will meet with students as scheduled or requested.
   5. I & RS Committee – for students who are experiencing any problems that might interfere with their academic performance. Referrals to I&RS can be made by any staff member or parent through the school counselor.
   6. Child Study Team – consists of a school psychologist, a learning consultant and a social worker. They work with the student, the parents, and the school to remedy the problem and to provide assistance wherever and whenever it is needed for classified students only. Students may be referred for CST evaluation through the I&RS Committee.
   7. Speech Therapy – is available with approval through Special Services.  Students are referred to I&RS Committee and screened by a speech therapist to determine need.
   8. Assessment – counselors and teachers review a variety of achievement, aptitude and interest tests to assess student performance and capabilities. These include teacher-made tests, exams, and standardized test data.
   9. College/Post-Secondary Placement – Counselors aid students in finding the right college, special business or technical school, or job.
   10. Financial Aid and Scholarship Information – the Counseling Office runs a variety of workshops during the school year on financial aid, college information, and scholarships. A financial aid program for parents/students is held in the fall. The counseling website has updated scholarship information. A newsletter is also posted regularly.
   11. Parent/Teacher Conference – parents may email the teacher to arrange a conference, or contact the counselor at 732-452-2811. 
PROCEDURES FOR MAKING A COUNSELING APPOINTMENT
The Counseling Office is open from 7:30 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. Counselors are there to help meet students’ needs, interests, and abilities. School counselors are assigned to students by homeroom sections and will make appointments with their counselees during the year to check on progress and to assist students with any difficulties that they are experiencing. There are several ways of getting to see a counselor:
   1. Counselors will make appointments with students for routine conferences, group sessions, scheduling, testing information, progress reports, etc.
   2. Students can request to see their counselors. There are forms in the Counseling Office. Fill the form out (name, homeroom, and reason to see your counselor) and leave it in the Counseling Office. The counselor will receive the form that same day and will schedule an appointment as soon as possible.
   3. Emergencies – if it is a serious emergency, then see if the counselor is available immediately. If the counselor is in a conference, sign in to the Counseling Office and let the staff know you need to be seen right away. Someone will be there to help.




SIGNING IN / SIGNING OUT
Student must sign in with a school ID when they report to their School Counselor. This provides an accurate record of the date and time that a student sees a counselor.
Students should not come down to the office without an appointment pass unless it is an emergency and should not sit and wait around the office for a long period of time hoping that a counselor will see them.  Students must notify the counselor that they are in the office and waiting; otherwise, the student will be charged with an unexcused absence from class (unless the counselor has called for the student).
REMEMBER it is every student’s responsibility to get permission from the regularly assigned teacher BEFORE reporting to the counseling office with an appointment pass.


SCHEDULE AND PROGRAM CHANGES
During the spring semester, students will register for next year’s courses and should choose carefully.  Alternates must be selected for some electives. The Program of Studies has further information about course offerings.
   1. Students register for classes in the spring by completing pre-registration in Parent Portal or submitting a Pre-Registration Form to the School Counselor. These forms are signed off by the student and parent/guardian indicating agreement with the recommended courses and selected electives.
   2. After June 1, no schedule changes may be made unless there is a placement change or error in the schedule. Any other request must be for significant reasons and approved by the Supervisor.
   3. If a student does not submit a pre-registration form to the counselor, the schedule will be developed by the counselor. No changes will be made.
   4. During the opening week of school in September, scheduling errors are resolved. Schedule changes that will be made are basic skills placement and adjustments for failure and summer school results.  No other schedule changes will be made.
   5. Students who simply desire to drop or change a course will not be permitted to do so.
   6. Schedule Changes : All changes must adhere to the following: 1. Any approved schedule change other than mistakes in placement will result in a Withdraw Pass (WP) or Withdraw Fail (WF) on the student’s permanent transcript starting the first day of school . Changes to a class level or dropping a class due to academic struggles will only be considered from the 6 th week of school through the end of the first Marking Period. 2. In the event that a change in schedule is affected due to course level, it should be unders tood by all involved parties that grades pre v iously received will follow the student to the new course. Grades in AP/Honors courses will not receive weighted credit once the course transfer is made. 3. Students who are enrolled in a class through the wai ver process will not be allowed to change classes or class levels
   7. Students experiencing academic difficulties or seeking a placement/level change must attempt the subject that they signed up for through the middle of the first marking period. At that time, they should make an appointment to discuss the issue with their counselor. Placement/level changes must be approved by the subject area supervisor.
   8. All students are encouraged to carry a full schedule of 7 courses (or the equivalent if semester courses are involved). The 8th class is a mandatory study hall. Seniors may take 5 courses if they meet all graduation requirements. Senior courses are scheduled first; early release is available only if the schedule permits it. No senior schedules are changed to accommodate early release.       
INTERVENTION AND REFERRAL SERVICES / I&RS
I&RS is a school-based committee/referral service whose primary role is to help students with learning, attendance, and/or behavioral, emotional or social problems receive the assistance they need within the regular education program setting.
The committee consists of an assistant principal, school nurse, teacher and the assigned school counselor(s).
A student may be referred to the committee by any member of the school staff or by parent request.  Once a student is referred, the committee reviews all information available in order to decide on the major problem and develop strategies for assistance. If the intervention plan and strategies fail to alleviate the problems, a referral to the Child Study Team for possible evaluation may be made. Procedures of I&RS are as follows:
   1. Notification to the parent and student after the initial meeting.
2.   Implementation of the intervention plan, which can include, but not be limited to:   
   1. Regular meeting with the crisis counselor.
   2. Regular meeting with the school counselor.
   3. Monitoring of student’s academics/behavior/attendance progress.
   4. Academic assistance (tutoring, supplemental instruction, etc.).
   5. Regular contact with the parent/teachers.
   3. Follow-up meetings will be held by the committee to determine the effectiveness of the interventions:
   1. If the student’s learning and/or behavior problems have been ameliorated, no further action may be necessary.
   2. If the student begins to improve, intervention may continue with a revised plan.
   3. If the student’s learning/behavior/attendance problems do not improve, a child study team referral may be initiated.
CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Conflict Resolution is available at J. P. Stevens High School to assist students in a conflict in resolving a problem. There are several staff members who are trained and available to provide conflict resolution. They include the assistant principals, school counselors, child study team, crisis counselor, and head security officer.  Students who anticipate or are involved in conflicts with other students should seek out this assistance in order to avoid a physical altercation and disciplinary action which would include suspension and possible expulsion.
HOMEWORK REQUESTS
If a student is to be absent for three (3) or more days, parents should contact the School Counseling Office to request homework and class assignments. These materials may be picked up by the parent as soon as available after the request. A call to the School Counseling Office should be made to insure the work is ready for pick up. For fewer than three days’ absence, it is expected that the student will ascertain the assignments on his/her own (via a classmate, teacher, e-mail or class website). All work provided is expected to be completed and handed in when the student returns to school. 
WORKING PAPERS
Any student under 18 years of age must have working papers in order to obtain employment in accordance with the labor laws as prescribed by the State of New Jersey. The procedures are as follows:
   1. Secure the following forms from the Counseling Office:
   1. Promise of Employment
   2. Physical Examination Form
   3. Student Personnel Data Form
   2. Return completed forms with a birth certificate to the Counseling Office.  
For the physical, see the school counseling secretary for the names of physicians available.  During the summer, students are responsible for obtaining their own physical through their family doctor. The birth certificate will be copied and returned.  
________________


ENROLLMENT / RESIDENCY


ENROLLMENT CENTER
Edison Township Board of Education
312 Pierson Avenue and Route 1
Edison, NJ  08837    ∙    (732) 452-4570




GENERAL PROCEDURES
   1. Enrollment Center personnel shall monitor the registration process.
   2. Only a parent or legal guardian may enroll a student.
   3. Student(s) must be present at the time of enrollment.
   4. Enrollment Center personnel shall provide parents/guardians with necessary forms, letters and affidavits.
   5. Enrollment Center personnel may request updated information from parents/guardians at any time.
   6. Students may be enrolled if they do not have updated immunization records, but cannot start school until appropriate documentation demonstrating compliance with rules regarding immunization of students is received at the Enrollment Center.
   7. All required documentation shall be maintained in the student’s cumulative record file at his/her school.
   8. All forms must be completed in their entirety, signed and dated by the individual completing the forms.
   9. Enrollment Center personnel shall provide parents/guardians with physical and dental forms, which must be returned to the school nurse within (30) days.
RESIDENCY ISSUES
The Board shall operate the schools of this district for the benefit of all children resident in the district and such others as may be admitted, pursuant to statute and policy of the Board. The Board reserves the right to verify the residency of any pupil and the validity of any affidavit of guardianship. Any residency related issues please contact the Enrollment Department at
312 Pierson Avenue and Route 1, Edison, NJ  08837 or by calling (732) 452-4570.
PROOF OF RESIDENCY
GENERAL
The following forms or documentation may demonstrate a student’s eligibility for enrollment in the Edison Township School District:
   * Property tax bills, deeds, contracts of sale, leases, mortgages, signed letters from landlords and other evidence of property ownership, tenancy or residency.
   * Voter registration, licenses, permits, financial account information, utility bills, delivery receipts, and other evidence of personal attachment to a particular location.
   * Court orders, state agency agreements and other evidence of court or agency placements or directives.
   * Receipts, bills, cancelled checks, insurance claims or payments, and other evidence of expenditures demonstrating personal attachment to a particular location or, where applicable, to support of the student.
   * Medical reports, counselor or social worker assessments, employment documents, unemployment claims, benefit statements and other evidence of circumstances demonstrating where applicable, family or economic hardship or temporary residency.
   * Affidavits, certifications and sworn attestations pertaining to statutory criteria for school attendance from the parent, legal guardian, person keeping an “affidavit of domicile” student, adult student, person(s) with whom a family is living, or others as appropriate.
   * Documents pertaining to military status and assignment.
   * Any business record or document issued by a government entity.
   * Any other form or documentation relevant to demonstrate entitlement to attend school.






PROOF OF RESIDENCY – TRANSFER STUDENTS


   * Proof of identity of parent/guardian (driver’s license/auto registration-insurance card/voter registration card.
   * Three proofs of residency.
   * Birth certificate or any official documentation indicating child’s age.
   * Updated immunization records with dates.
   * Current telephone number.
   * Current parent/guardian workplace with telephone number if available.
   * Current emergency contact name/relationship/telephone number.
   * Transfer card.
   * School records (test scores, report card, etc.).


PROOF OF RESIDENCY – DOMICILE STUDENTS 
(Students not residing with parent/guardian)


   1. All required documentation as above.
   2. Notarized parent affidavit regarding the inability to support or care for the child due to economic or family hardship.
   3. Notarized resident affidavit stating that the child is residing with resident and resident is providing support for the child.
CHANGE OF ADDRESS / TELEPHONE NUMBER
Parents and students are advised to report immediately any changes in their address to the Enrollment Center at the Education Center, 312 Pierson Avenue.  Telephone number changes should be given to the Counseling Office.
ATTENDANCE PROCEDURE SUMMARY
The Board of Education is required to have a student attendance policy.  The regulations for this policy are based on a six-day limit to the number of unexcused absences from any full-year course.  Pupils exceeding the attendance limits for unexcused absences (see table below) in any class(es) are required to attend Credit Completion Summer School to receive credit for the class(es).  


Attendance Limits for UNEXCUSED Absences
	Full-year course
	6 class absences          (7+ requires credit completion)
	Semester course
	3 class absences         (4+ requires credit completion)
	Physical Education
	4 class absences         (5+ requires credit completion)
	Health/Driver Ed.
	2 class absences         (3+ requires credit completion)
	

Unexcused absences include full-day absences from school and tardiness to school that causes pupils to miss more than fifteen minutes of class and early dismissals. There are very few exceptions that will result in absences being deemed as “Excused,” and as such will not being charged against the attendance limits in the table above.  Seniors who have not met all graduation requirements are not eligible to participate in the graduation ceremonies.   Pupils and parent(s) or legal guardian(s) are encouraged to become familiar with the Attendance Policy and to monitor regularly the attendance records of their child(ren) and bring any problems to the attention of the administration.
The absence of a pupil for three consecutive days, without proper written notification, shall be sufficient reason for a check of the home by an attendance officer.
Students who are absent/tardy/dismissed early from school (excused or unexcused) may not participate in, attend, or be involved in any co-curricular program or after-school/evening-school activities without prior approval of the Principal or Assistant Principal.
When pupils are absent from school, regardless of the reason, they are required to make up those assignments deemed necessary. When course requirements during a marking period have not been completed to the satisfaction of the teacher, an incomplete (INC) grade may be issued. The teacher will communicate the pupil’s lack of progress to the pupil, parent(s) or legal guardian(s), and school counselor. It is the responsibility of each student receiving an incomplete (INC) to determine from the teacher which requirements are outstanding. (See Incomplete Policy)  
According to Board regulations, “excused absence” is a pupil's absence from school for a full day or a portion of a day for one or more of the following reasons:
   * Illness requiring hospitalization—all days deducted with medical verification.
   * Illness of a chronic or persistent nature and requires regularly scheduled medical treatment over a prolonged period. Specific medical verification is required, and specific procedures must be followed (see procedures below). Such cases will be subject to periodic review by the school nurse or school doctor.
   * Death in the immediate family (parents, grandparents, siblings). In such cases, up to three days will not be charged against the six-day absence allotment.
   * Religious holidays as published annually by the State Board of Education will not be charged against the six-day absence allotment provided that a parent signed note is submitted to the Attendance Office, preferably in advance;
   * College visitations require verification from the college (signed note on college letterhead indicating dates of attendance). Up to three days will not be charged against the six-day absence allotment. It is expected that the great majority of college visits will be made during the preceding summer, school holidays, weekends, or after school hours;
   * Personal illness that is verified by a non-family member doctor’s note signed and stamped by doctor’s office with 48 hours of return to school or by the school nurse;
   * Three (3) single-day absences (separate occurrences/not consecutive days) will be allowed as “excused” without a doctor’s note. A phone call by a parent/guardian is required on the day of each absence and must be followed by a detailed note by the parent. The principal has the final authority to disallow excused if s/he feels the policy is being misused or abused.
   * Take your son/daughter to work day—pupils between the ages of nine and fifteen will not be charged with an absence if, prior to the designated day, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) provides a note verifying the work location to be visited;
   * For pupils with disabilities, the school district shall require the attendance plans and punitive and remedial measures in accordance with the pupils:
   * IEP, pursuant to USC 1400 et. Seq., the IDEIA;
   * Procedural protections set forth in N.J.A.C. 6A:14;
   * Accommodation plans under 29 USC 794 and 705 (20);
   * Individualized health care plans, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 6A:16-2.362ix.
Note:  Vacations or family travel while school is in session will not be considered as extenuating circumstances and will not be considered legal or legitimate reasons for absence.
PROCEDURES FOR COLLEGE VISITATION
Required college visitations that are verified and approved in advance by the principal will not be charged as unexcused.  Students are allowed up to three visitations per school year, provided the student is eligible to attend the school and is seriously considering attending the school. Class absences will be excused based on the length of the visit. Visits to local colleges/universities only require half-day absences.  Middlesex County College may be visited on weekends, and therefore VISITATION DURING THE SCHOOL DAY WILL NOT BE EXCUSED. Required placement tests for Middlesex County College, however, may be excused. Prior to the visitation, a parent/guardian signed letter indicating the college and date of the visit must be submitted to the Attendance Office. Visitation verification includes a written statement on college/university letterhead including the date of and reason for visitation.  All verification must be submitted to the Attendance Office upon the students’ return to school. A second visit to a school will require a clear explanation of the reason beyond a tour.
PROCEDURES FOR CHRONIC ILLNESS
Chronic illness is an exception to the Attendance Policy. However, there are several requirements in order for this exception to be approved and absences excused accordingly:
   1. A doctor’s note must be presented to an Assistant Principal for approval. The doctor’s note must contain the following:
   1. an indication that a “chronic medical condition” exists.
   2. the identification of the chronic condition.
   3. an indication that the chronic condition will cause the student to be absent and/or tardy more than normal during the school year.
NOTE: School officials may periodically verify chronic status with physician during school year.
   2. ABSENCE FROM SCHOOL – Once the doctor’s note is accepted and approved, absences will be excused only if a parent calls the Attendance Office before 11 a.m. on the day of the absence and specifies that the absence is due to the chronic condition.
   3. TARDINESS TO SCHOOL – If a student is tardy to school, the tardy will be excused only if the parent calls the Attendance Office by 10 a.m. on the same day and indicates that the reason is the chronic condition.
   4. EARLY DISMISSAL – If a student signs out for early dismissal (including through the nurse’s office), the absence will be excused only if a parent or nurse indicates that it is due to the chronic illness. 
   5. Absences/tardies/early dismissals will not be excused if notification is received the day after.  A call must be made the day of in order to be excused. 
   6. Exceptions for chronic illness become effective from the date the doctor’s note is received and approved by the Administration. The doctor’s note must be renewed at the start of each year.
   7. Students who have chronic illness notes on file and are absent, tardy to school, or dismiss early may not participate in, attend, or be involved in any co-curricular programs or after-school/evening activities without prior approval of the Principal or Assistant Principal.  Forms for such approval are available in the Attendance Office.
PROCEDURES FOR RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
Religious holidays as published annually by the State Board of Education will not be charged against the six day absence allotment up to a limit of three days. To be excused for a religious holiday, a student must submit a parent signed note to the Attendance Office preferably prior to the holiday. 
 CREDIT COMPLETION
   1. In accordance with the Attendance Policy, students exceeding the UNEXCUSED absence limits shall be required to attend a Credit Completion summer school.
   2. Students who do not complete the Credit Completion summer school will be required to repeat the relevant courses; this could mean repeating the grade. Attending Summer School for failure make-up does not remediate the credit completion requirements. Failure to earn credits in required courses could affect graduation. For seniors, this would preclude the right to participate in the June graduation. Diplomas will be awarded after Credit Completion.
ATTENDANCE POLICY SUMMARY (cont.)
   3. Requests for appeals are to be submitted in writing to the Principal after a review with the Assistant Principal.


TARDINESS / EARLY DISMISSAL
   1. Students who arrive at school after the start of homeroom are considered tardy to school and must sign in at the Attendance Office.
   2. Students who are tardy to school will be subject to disciplinary action as follows:
6th occasion ------ 1 day central detention
8th occasion ------ 2 days central detention
10th occasion ------ 4 hour Saturday detention
12th occasion ------ In-school suspension
Subsequent occasions ------ subject to administrative action 
   3. Tardiness to school which results in tardiness to a class up to 15 minutes will not be charged as a class absence. Students who are tardy 16 minutes or more shall be charged with a class absence which counts against the unexcused absence allotment cited above.
NOTE: Tardiness or early dismissal due to attendance at religious services or driver test appointments will be excused if proper documentation is submitted.
   4. Please note that individual classes missed (15 minutes or more) due to your child being signed-out early from school ARE COUNTED towards the attendance limits for those classes. Unless the reason for the missed class(es) is deemed as “excused” as outlined in the Attendance Policy, the class absences may lead to Summer School Credit Completion.
   5. Students who are tardy to school or dismissed early may not participate in, attend, or be involved in any co-curricular programs or after-school/evening activities without prior approval of the Principal or Assistant Principal. FORMS FOR SUCH APPROVAL ARE AVAILABLE IN THE ATTENDANCE OFFICE.


ABSENCES IN EXCESS OF UNEXCUSED ATTENDANCE LIMITS
   1. The Assistant Principal will notify the parent or guardian and the student by letter that a student is required to fulfill Credit Completion.
   2. Appeals must be submitted in writing to the Principal after a review by the Assistant Principal.
   3. The Principal will notify the parent/guardian in writing of the decision regarding the appeal.
   4. The parent/guardian will be scheduled for a conference (if desired) with the Principal if the appeal is not approved.
   5. The parent/guardian may appeal the Principal’s decision to the Superintendent of Schools. (Parent should contact the Superintendent for a conference.)
   6. The parent/guardian may appeal the Superintendent’s decision to the Board of Education. (Request Superintendent to arrange a meeting with Committee of Board of Education.)
   7. The decision of the Board of Education may be appealed to the Commissioner of Education.


CLASS CUTTING
   1. If a student accumulates three (3) cuts in a full-year course and two (2) cuts in all other courses (Health and Physical Education treated as separate classes) the student shall be removed from the class with no credit earned and no option for summer school. Prerequisites for sequential courses shall be successfully completed.
   2. Students who cut class or an assigned location (e.g. lunch, study hall, homeroom) will be subject to disciplinary action, including detention(s) and suspension(s). The cut(s) will count as an unexcused absence from class.                
C.        Students who cut class will receive a zero for all work, tests, assessments completed on the day of the cut, regardless of how significantly the zero will affect the overall grade for the course. Students will not be given extra time to complete assignments.


SCHEDULED EARLY RELEASE
Students who are on Early Release:
   1. Must leave the school building/grounds immediately at their release time.
   2. If students are on school property after their release time, they will lose their early release      privileges and be assigned to study hall(s).
   3. May not return to school property at 2:30 to take bus transportation home. 


HOMEWORK / MAKE-UP WORK
The board considers valid homework assignments to be those which reflect the curriculum, stimulate intellectual growth, accommodate the needs of individual students, and contribute to the development of academic self-discipline. The board encourages the assignment of inter-related homework such as term papers, research and creative arts projects.
   1. Students at all academic levels of instruction in all grades and subjects shall receive homework regularly throughout the school year. When long-term homework assignments extend over a vacation period, sufficient time shall be provided prior to and/or after the vacation period for students to complete the assigned work.
   2. The specific amount and type of homework assignments shall be consistent with the requirements of the curriculum and the educational needs of students. Homework shall not be assigned as a punitive measure.
   3. Homework assignments shall be reviewed and evaluated, and the evaluation shall be shared with the student within a reasonable period of time.
   4. Homework shall be a factor in evaluating student progress and in determining student grades.


HOMEWORK / MAKE-UP WORK (CONT.)


   5. Students who have been absent shall be given a reasonable amount of time to make up homework assignments, class work and tests. In most cases, a reasonable length of time shall be the same number of school days as the days missed. When a due date for an assignment is known in advance of the absence, however, students should return from the absence prepared with the work or for the test.
   6. Pupils being excused from class(es) for any reason must make arrangements with the teacher of the missed class(es) in order to make up the work missed. This must be done before the absence from class.        
   7. The board policy on cheating, part of Policy #6147.1, Evaluation of Individual Student Performance, applies.
   8. If a student is absent 4 or more days, during the absence, the parent/guardian may contact the School Counseling Office to collect a list of missed assignments.
EXPECTED STUDENT BEHAVIORS BY LOCATION




Auditorium
   * Enter/exit in an orderly manner and fill in seats
   * Keep your feet on the floor, sit up straight and listen to the speaker
   * Keep hands, feet and objects to self
   * Use polite words
   * Leave nothing behind
	

Bathroom
   * Return to class quickly and quietly
   * Keep area clean, graffiti free, and smoke free
   * Wash and dry your hands
   * Report problems or damage to a staff member
	

Classroom
   * Arrive to class on time
   * Be prepared, listen, and learn from bell to bell
   * Honor  personal space 
   * Use appropriate language and be polite
   * Follow teacher directions
   * Clean up after yourself
   * Place personal items under your desk
   * Sign in and out
	

Cafeteria
   * Have your lunch money/ID card ready
   * Keep your place in line
   * Be courteous to cafeteria workers, security, custodians, teachers and fellow students
   * Listen to announcements
   * Speak in a conversational tone and use polite words.
   * Keep hands, feet and objects to self
   * Clean up your area, push in chairs
   * Dispose of food and drink before leaving cafe
   * Recycle


	

Homeroom
   * Be prepared and go to locker before homeroom
   * Be on time
   * Be seated from bell to bell
   * Coats and book bags must be left in lockers
   * Dispose of food and drink before entering
   * Be quiet and listen to announcements
   * Use appropriate language and be polite
   * Abide by district dress code


	

Hallways
   * Walk directly to your destination 
   * Have a visible signed pass
   * Speak in a conversational tone
   * Use polite words
   * Stay to the right and keep moving
   * Keep hands and objects to yourself


	

	

Entering and Exiting the Building
   * Turn off all electronic devices
   * Hats, headwear, Ipods and cell phones must be put away prior to entering the building and must remain away until outside the building


	

Library


   * Have a signed official Library pass


   * Use your ID card to use computers and borrow books


   * Group work is limited to four students
	

Locker Room
   * Speak in a conversational tone
   * Use polite words
   * Follow teacher directions
   * Respect each other’s personal space
   * Respect each other’s belongings.


	



	STUDENT BEHAVIOR AT SCHOOL EVENTS / ACTIVITIES
Good sportsmanship is expected at school events. Failure to comply may result in removal from the premises, restriction from future events, and/or disciplinary action. No noisemakers, signs or banners are allowed at athletic events pursuant to Greater Middlesex Conference regulations.


DANCE RULES
   1. Other than semi-formals, proms, or special events, only J. P. Stevens High School students with appropriate ID card may attend.
   2. If a student leaves the dance, he/she may not return and must leave the grounds.
   3. Students are not permitted to congregate or loiter on the grounds while a dance is in progress.
   4. The mode of dress should be appropriate to the affair and reflect good taste, good hygiene, and sensibility.  Any student judged to be inappropriately dressed will be dismissed from the dance.
   5. Students who are in possession or judged to be under the influence of drugs or alcohol shall be denied admission. Parents will be called and appropriate disciplinary action will also be taken.
   6. Students on suspension, special probation, or who are absent from school on the day of the event cannot attend dances.
   7. The supervising staff members shall have the authority to ask any person to leave the dance or forbid a person admission.
   8. All other school rules will be enforced.
DRESS CODE
  The manner of dress must not create classroom disorder or distract others.  The administration reserves the right to restrict or prohibit any manner of dress or apparel judged to be inappropriate, a distraction to the learning environment, or apparel that presents a safety hazard.  The following guidelines are established to assist in maintaining the proper dress for school as per BOE POLICY 5132:
   1. Students may not wear apparel that promotes or endorses illegal substances (i.e., drugs, alcohol or tobacco products). In addition, students may not wear clothing with messages deemed offensive, profane or inappropriate as judged by the administration.
   2. Students may not wear strapless, see-through, one-shouldered, off-the-shoulder or halter tops. Additionally, bustiers, tops with cut outs, or shirts that allow the midriff to be exposed are not permitted (with arms raised the shirt must cover the midriff). Proper attire should include undergarments. No undergarments should be visible or worn as outerwear.
   3. Tank tops, sleeveless tops and tops with thin straps may be worn, but the top must fall reasonably close to the neckline, as judged by the administration, and fall directly below the underarm to insure that the torso and undergarments are not exposed inappropriately. Bra straps must be covered. Tops that have lingerie or adjustable straps are not permitted. Clothing with thin straps should be worn with strapless undergarments.
   4. No sunglasses may be worn during the school day (unless medically prescribed).  
   5. Students may not wear short skirts or short shorts. Shorts and skirts should have a reasonable distance from the knee but should not be shorter than mid-thigh. Ripped jeans should not be ripped in areas which could be considered as inappropriate as judged by the administration.
   6. Students are not permitted to wear or carry baseball caps or outerwear, such as winter coats, rain coats, heavy jackets, varsity jackets, during the school day. Windbreakers, lightweight jackets or lightweight jackets that are a part of a uniform or a warm-up suit are permitted during the school day.
NOTE:  On special occasion days, such as School Spirit Day, the Principal is authorized to permit the wearing of hats or sports uniforms.  
   7. Ski masks are not permitted to be worn in school. Any similar types of hats or hoods that hide the face are not permitted and will be confiscated. 
   8. Raise your hands, touch your toes. If anything shows, then change your clothes.
   9. Students are not permitted to wear clothing that are clearly pajamas, slippers, or sleepwear.
NOTE:  On special occasions, such as School Spirit Day, the Principal is authorized to permit the wearing of pajamas, slippers and sleepwear.
   10. Students may not wear gloves of any kind (i.e. winter gloves, mittens, batter’s gloves, etc.).
   11. Students are not allowed to carry backpacks or oversized purses during the school day. However, laptop bags and appropriate purses are allowed.
ITEMS PROHIBITED IN SCHOOL
The following are prohibited in school: animals, helium balloons, video games, skate boards (used on school grounds and must be carried while on school grounds), water pistols, cigarettes/smokeless tobacco, hookah pens/electronic cigarettes, laser pens, and any other items judged by the administration to be inappropriate for school.  Cell phones, IPods and any electronic communication devices can be brought to school, but must remain off and out of sight the entire school day from 7:00 am through 3:00 pm.  Headphones and earbuds are not permitted to be worn in your ears, around your neck or dangling from your ears during the school day.
In addition, items such as studded belts/buckles/collars/bracelets, heavy jewelry, chains worn as necklaces/bracelets or connected to a wallet are not permitted and could be considered a weapon if used as such. 
ARRIVAL AT SCHOOL


Upon arrival, students must wait in front of the building until the doors are opened (approximately 7:15 a.m.).  After entering the building, students must go to their lockers, take care of any school business in the various offices, and report to their homeroom locations.  STUDENTS MAY NOT LOITER IN THE PARKING LOTS OR ON SCHOOL GROUNDS BEFORE OR AFTER SCHOOL.  All students must report to homeroom by the 7:35 a.m. warning bell.  Students who arrive after homeroom starts must report to the Attendance Office and sign in as tardy.          
HOMEROOM
The homeroom period is a five-minute period designed for a number of administrative functions, including the pledge of allegiance, daily announcements, and the recording of student attendance. In homeroom each morning, students are asked to stand during the flag salute and pledge of allegiance via the P.A. system.  During the pledge and announcements students must remain quiet to insure that everyone can hear. No food, drinks, or backpacks are allowed into homeroom.
FLAG SALUTE / PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
New Jersey law requires that you show respect for the flag of the United States. If you are conscientiously opposed to the pledge or salute, you may abstain from these ceremonies, but you are required by law to remain respectfully silent.
In homeroom each morning students are asked via the P.A. system to stand during the flag salute and pledge of allegiance.
DURING THE PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE, ALL PERSONS THROUGHOUT THE BUILDING (IN THE HALLS, OFFICE, ETC.) ARE TO STOP AND STAND QUIETLY UNTIL THE PLEDGE HAS BEEN COMPLETED.
________________
HALLWAY PASSING TIME
STUDENTS MUST ARRIVE TO CLASS BEFORE THE BELL!
Students are given five minutes to change classes, including lunch.  Students may use the lavatory at this time but may not loiter in the hallways or in the lavatories. They must report directly to their next class or location. The only passing allowed outside is in the back courtyard between the “A” wing and the cafeteria.
HALL PASS GUIDELINES
   1. Staff members will NOT issue a pass for a student to miss another class except in an emergency situation or for a pre-arranged appointment/task.
   2. Students should never leave class without a proper pass. The actual passes that will be given to students, including the following:
   1. JPS Pass on lanyard.
   2. LAMINATED – for a short run only (e.g. lavatory, locker, etc.).
   3. JPS HALL PASS  – filled out by a teacher with a specific date, time, location, etc.
   4. PRE-PRINTED APPOINTMENT PASS – provided for pre-arranged appointments such as the Counseling Office, CST, Office, tutoring, etc.
   5. Garbage can lids are not to be used as hall passes.
   3. No students should be in the halls during classes without a pass.
   4. Passes will not be issued because a student simply requests one. The student must show that prior arrangements (i.e. appointment pass) were made or an emergency exists.
   5. Students should always report to their assigned teacher first in order to be excused and to avoid a cut slip being submitted.  The exceptions would only be as follows:
   1. Vocal or Instrumental Lessons from study hall.  A list of students scheduled will be made available to study hall teachers in advance. The students report directly to music; their attendance is taken by the music teacher. Students remain on the study hall roster but are responsible to the music teacher.
   2. Student Council – Student Council Officers are assigned on a permanent basis to the Student Council Office by the Student Council Advisor. Study hall teachers maintain them on their rolls but give up their attendance to the Student Council Advisor.
   3. Peer Tutoring – The procedures for peer tutoring are developed by the counseling office and are approved by the administration. Students involved in such tutoring sessions must sign in to tutoring location (counseling office or library).
   6. Even with an appointment slip, a teacher reserves the right to prohibit a student from leaving class/study hall.  This assumes no emergency, and the teacher has valid reason to do so.
   7. MAKE-UP WORK – In no case should make-up work disrupt or interfere with a teacher’s responsibility to a class and instruction at that time. The make-up work (science lab, test, computer assignment, etc.) must be a type and nature that is non-intrusive.    
   1. Arrangements between a teacher and student to make up work should be made prior to the student’s study hall (a day in advance if possible).
   2. The teacher would issue a JPS Hall Pass which the student must show to the study hall teacher verifying a scheduled appointment.
   3. Whenever possible, this pass will be shown to the study hall teacher the day before. If not, it will be given to the study hall teacher when the student returns to study hall, which could be the next day.
   4. If a subject teacher emails the student’s study hall teacher before study hall, the student can go straight to the subject teacher to make up the work and must return with a signed pass from the teacher.
   5. IT IS THE STUDENT’S RESPONSIBILITY TO PROVIDE VERIFICATION TO THE STUDY HALL TEACHER. FAILURE TO DO SO WILL RESULT IN A CHARGE OF CUTTING.        `
SCHOOL DISMISSAL PROCEDURES
During the school day, students are not permitted to leave the school grounds without permission. Such action will result in disciplinary action, including possible suspension. Students may go outside the building when passing from class to class only in the courtyard near the cafeteria. STUDENTS MAY NOT LOITER OUTSIDE THE SCHOOL BUILDING OR ON SCHOOL GROUNDS (including the parking areas) AT ANY TIME.
STUDENTS WITH EARLY RELEASE must leave the building immediately after their last class. They should not loiter or delay their departure since it tends to be disruptive to classes still in session. Failure to comply may result in assignment to study hall and loss of early release. If a student has good reason to remain after class, arrangements should be made through the Administration.


After school, students must be under the direct supervision of a staff member or must leave the premises. Late buses may be available at 4:00 p.m. Special late bus passes, available from the staff, must be used in order to ride these late buses.
   1. Students wishing to be dismissed early should present a note to the Attendance Office before homeroom.  All notes must be verified before a student is released. No student is allowed to sign out without parental permission regardless of age.
   2. Please note that individual classes missed due to your child being signed out early from school ARE COUNTED towards the attendance limits for those classes.  Unless the reason for the missed class(es) is deemed as “excused” as outlined in the Attendance Policy, the class absences may lead to Summer School Credit Completion.
   3. Students who become ill during the day may be released by the Nurse only. Parents will be contacted in such cases.  (This dismissal time will be chargeable to the student).  Absences from class(es) due to time in the Clinic for illness or early dismissal for illness are unexcused absences. 
STUDENT IDENTIFICATION CARDS
   1. All grade 9 and new students will have their pictures taken in August/September for an ID card. ID cards will be issued to students as soon as is possible.
   2. Students must show their ID card when requested by staff and need the card for lunch, library, tardy desk and entrance to certain after school activities. Students without ID cards when asked by a staff member to produce one are subject to disciplinary action.  
   3. Students who do not have an ID card or lose it must see the Librarian before or after school to obtain a replacement. There is a $5.00 fee to replace lost ID cards.
   4. All grade 11 students will receive new ID cards in the first few months of their junior year.
FIRE / SECURITY DRILLS
New Jersey law (N.J.S.18A:41-1) requires all public and nonpublic schools to hold two emergency drills per month, namely a fire drill and a security drill (evacuation, lockdown, etc.). Drills inside the buildings will be held during school hours and summer months when they are open for educational purposes.
FIRE DRILLS
Fire drills are necessary for the safety of the students and faculty. Everyone should know the specific directions for reaching a point of safety from those areas of the building in which he/she may be. This information is posted on a sign adjacent to or above the exit door of each room.  Any specific directions or other information regarding a fire drill will be announced at the time via the PA System.
   1. Regardless of the conditions, whenever the alarm signals, the building must be cleared quickly, quietly, and orderly.
   2. All windows must be closed.
   3. Students must follow the designated exit instructions and leave the building in an orderly manner.  Students must remain silent.
   4. Students must remain with their class and teacher.
   5. Students must move as far away from the building as possible.
   6. Administration will signal when it is time to return to the building.
   7. Whatever period the alarm occurs will be the same period to which students return. If it is close to the end of the period, the bells will be turned off. Students return to the same period and wait for instructions over the PA regarding the remaining schedule for the day.
   8. If there is a need to change the procedure or alter the plan, this will be communicated over the PA.  In addition, security and administrative staff will circulate outside to advise of any change.
   9. Students referred to the office for any violation of the above rules will be subject to disciplinary action.


ANY STUDENT WHO PULLS A FALSE ALARM WILL BE SUBJECT TO SERIOUS DISCIPLINARY ACTION, INCLUDING SUSPENSION FROM SCHOOL AND A REFERRAL TO THE SUPERINTENDENT. IN ADDITION, A POLICE COMPLAINT WILL BE FILED.


EVACUATION / LOCKDOWN DRILLS
Depending on the situation, notification of the need to evacuate or lockdown will be announced.  Students must remain silent and follow the direction of faculty/staff. Students should remember to stay calm and await further information/instruction. Further directions will be given as necessary during the evacuation / lockdown.  UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCE ARE STUDENTS TO USE ELECTRONIC DEVICES TO COMMUNICATE WITH PEOPLE OUTSIDE THE BUILDING.
STUDENT DISCIPLINE
GENERAL INFORMATION
Good behavior is a cooperative effort and a matter of common sense. If a student were to adopt the policy that the main purpose of school is education and strive toward that goal, disciplinary problems would be non-existent. However, part of growing up is to make mistakes at times. Students must understand that failure to meet their responsibilities will carry consequences.
Emphasis must always be given to helping students develop the necessary self-discipline that will allow them to be productive students and citizens. They must be reminded that their actions always reflect on themselves, their family, their school, and their community.
Students must always exercise self-discipline to the extent that they do not interfere with the rights of others. Any form of behavior or conduct which is disruptive not only prevents individual learning but almost always interferes with the learning opportunities of others and, therefore, cannot be tolerated.
The report of a student to the office is considered serious and will result in a warning, detention, and/or suspension. Continued referrals to the office will result in more serious action being taken since such referrals are cumulative for the school year and can be considered continued and willful disobedience. The most serious offenses, such as assault, weapon use/possession, terroristic threats, arson, and other similar acts, will result in a police report/complaint, long-term suspension, and referral to the Superintendent of Schools.
Each case will be handled as rapidly, firmly, and fairly as possible.  Consideration will be given to the individual and circumstances.  Every effort will be made to communicate with all the parties involved, especially the parents.  When students are referred to the office, they will be given the opportunity to present their side of the matter, and due process will be followed.
The administration recognizes its responsibility and right to take reasonable disciplinary action for student behavior and/or conduct that is contrary to school rules or that is judged inappropriate by the administration.
Students must adhere to all school rules and regulations and must follow the reasonable request or directive of any staff member.  These rules and regulations also extend to all school related functions both on and off school property and are in effect while students are en-route to and from school.
STUDENT DISCIPLINE CATEGORIES
Discipline reports generally fall into one of several categories which can be defined as follows:
INSUBORDINATION
   1. Not following classroom/school rules, regulations or procedures.
   2. Not following a staff member’s reasonable request or directive.
   3. Refusal to participate or do work in class.
   4. Sleeping in class.
   5. Tardiness to class or assigned locations.
   6. Misuse or abuse of hall passes.
   7. Loitering on school grounds after dismissal without being under the direct supervision of a staff member.
   8. Unprepared for physical education classes.
   9. Violations of the dress code as outlined in the Student-Parent Handbook.
   10. Bringing prohibited items to school:  animals, helium balloons, video games, laser pens, skateboards (must be carried and not used on school grounds), water pistols, cigarettes/smokeless chewing tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and any other item judged inappropriate.
   11. Any other act or behavior judged by the administration to be insubordination.


FAILURE TO FOLLOW PROCEDURES
   1. Failure to explain an absence on the day of return to school.
   2. Failure to explain a tardy to school later than 7:40 a.m.
   3. Failure to sign in tardy at the Attendance Office.
   4. Failure to sign attendance sheets in the Library, Nurse’s Office, or School Counseling Office when visiting.
   5. Failure to secure regularly assigned teacher’s permission to be excused from class.
   6. Failure to obtain administrative approval to sign out early.
   7. Use of the telephone during school hours without permission.
   8. Failure to comply with motor vehicle requirements as they apply to parking and driving on school grounds or within the student parking areas.
   9. Any other act or behavior judged by the administration to be failure to follow procedures.


INAPPROPRIATE CONDUCT
Any conduct, behavior, or action of a student judged to be unacceptable, including but not limited to profane, obscene, abusive, or vulgar comments, and/or gestures. Depending on seriousness or if directed at a staff member, immediate suspension will occur pending a review by the Superintendent.
CUTTING TEACHER / CENTRAL / SATURDAY DETENTION
A student who is absent from an assigned teacher/Saturday/central detention will be subject to detention reassignment and additional disciplinary action. Students who serve detention with a teacher must remain under the teacher’s direct supervision until dismissed and transportation is available.

SMOKING OR CHEWING / SMOKELESS TOBACCO
The Board of Education and the State of New Jersey prohibit smoking on school property. The use of e-cigarettes or chewing/smokeless tobacco is also prohibited. Students are not permitted to bring cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or chewing/smokeless tobacco to school. For students, consequences will include disciplinary action (detentions and suspensions) and monetary fines through the Board of Health, ranging from $25 to $100 with Municipal Court action for unpaid fines.  (BOE POLICY 3515)


INVALID ABSENCES / CLASS CUTTING
Invalid absence (which includes cutting class or an assigned location) is defined as being absent for an unexplained, unexcused, or unjustifiable reason. This can be for all day or part of a day. The Class Cutting Policy provides for the removal from class without credit after three (3) cuts from full year classes and after two (2) cuts from PE, Health or a semester class. THE ENTIRE COURSE MUST BE REPEATED IN THE NEXT ACADEMIC YEAR.  THERE WILL BE NO OPTION TO ATTEND SUMMER SCHOOL.  (BOE POLICY 5113)


TARDINESS / EARLY DISMISSAL
   1. Students who arrive at school after the start of homeroom or do not report to homeroom on time are considered tardy and must sign in at the Attendance Office.  (BOE POLICY 5113)
   2. Students who arrive to class beyond 15 minutes into the period because of tardiness to school will be charged with an unexcused absence from that class.  (BOE POLICY 5113)
   3. Students who are tardy to school will be subject to disciplinary action as follows (BOE POLICY 5113)
                 6th occasion  – 1 day central detention
                 8th occasion  – 2 days central detention
                10th occasion – 4 hour Saturday detention
                12th occasion – 1 day in-school suspension
                Subsequent occasions – administrative action
NOTE:  Tardiness or early dismissal due to attendance at religious services, driver test appointment, or other reason deemed as “excused” by the Attendance Policy will not be included in cumulative unexcused tardy total.
NOTE:  Students who are tardy to the same class 3 times will be subject to 1 day central detention.  


FIGHTING
Fighting is considered extremely serious and will result in suspension from school. Depending on the seriousness and a student’s previous disciplinary record, a referral to the Superintendent and a long-term suspension (up to 21 days) may be made pending a review to consider an expulsion hearing. If a fight results in a staff member being injured or hit collaterally, the student will be charged with aggravated assault. A police complaint would be signed, and the student would be referred to the Superintendent for further disciplinary action.


VANDALISM (INCLUDING GRAFFITI)
Vandalism is the wanton, deliberate, and/or malicious destruction or defacement of school property, rendering it inoperable, unusable, or seriously unsightly, thereby causing an economic loss to the district.  N.J. law now says that if a student defaces any surface with graffiti he/she may have his/her motor vehicle and/or motorized bicycle driving privileges postponed, suspended or revoked for one year. The penalty begins on the day the sentence is imposed and ends one year after the 17th birthday. A second graffiti conviction may entail a two year penalty that begins immediately after the first penalty ends. Other penalties, fines or sentences may also be impacted by the court for a graffiti offense. Also included in vandalism would be any acts involving arson and fireworks.  If serious, immediate suspension and a referral to the Superintendent would be made. A police complaint or report would be filed. Restitution would be required.

THEFT
Theft is the unlawful taking of another’s property without his/her consent. If serious, immediate suspension and a referral to the Superintendent would be made. A police complaint or report would be filed.  Restitution would be required.

GAMBLING
Gambling is an illegal act and includes any involvement in a game of chance for money or other stakes.  This includes any betting pools, such as those related to athletic contests. Card playing or games with dice are considered gambling even if no money is visible. If serious, immediate suspension and a referral to the Superintendent would be made. A police complaint or report would be filed. Restitution would be required.


CELL PHONES / ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES.
The use of all cell phones and other electronic communication devices (including iPod Touch) is prohibited during the school day. Students need to turn off communication devices before entering the building in the morning. The devices must remain off and out of sight throughout the duration of the school day until 2:45 p.m. (3:45 p.m. for those in the library or central detention). Students in violation of these procedures will have their phones and memory cards confiscated for a period of time corresponding to the frequency of the violation.
The administration understands the importance of parent/child communication; however, students do not always use the devices appropriately. Cell phones can cause a disruption in class and also have been misused for cheating, “sexting” (sending/receiving sexually explicit pictures), and drug-related correspondence. If a parent needs to reach a child during the day in an emergency, he/she may call the front office immediately at 732-452-2800.


ASSAULT
An assault is committed by causing or attempting to cause bodily injury to another purposely, knowingly, or recklessly; by negligently causing bodily injury to another with a weapon; or by attempting by physical menace (as opposed to using a weapon) to put another in fear of imminent serious bodily injury. Assaults are considered simple or aggravated. Aggravated is distinguished from simple by the severity of the bodily injury. (BOE POLICY 5131.5/NJSA 2C:12-1) By law, an assault on a staff member is always considered aggravated assault; an Expulsion Hearing and police complaint may occur.


TERRORISTIC THREATS
A person commits a terrorist threat if he/she threatens to commit any crime of violence with purpose to terrorize another; or cause evacuation of a building, facility of public transportation, or other place of assembly; or otherwise cause serious public inconvenience, in reckless disregard of the risk of causing such terror or inconvenience. (BOE POLICY 5131.5/NJSA 2C:12-3) Depending on the seriousness and intent, or if directed at/upon a staff member, a referral to the Superintendent would be made to consider additional disciplinary action. A police report or complaint would be filed.


SEX OFFENSE


A person is guilty of a sex offense if he/she subjects another to sexual contact or exposure without consent.  (BOE POLICY 4111.1/4211.1) Depending on the seriousness and intent or if directed at or upon a staff member, a referral to the Superintendent would be made for an Administrative Hearing. A police report or complaint would be filed.


POSSESSION / USE OF A WEAPON
A weapon means anything readily capable of lethal use or of inflicting serious bodily injury. The term includes, but is not limited to, all (1) firearms, even though not loaded or lacking a clip or other component to render them immediately operable; (2) components which can be readily assembled into a weapon; (3) gravity knives, switchblade knives, daggers, dirks, stilettos, or pocket knives, billies, blackjacks, bludgeons, metal knuckles, sand clubs, slingshots, cesti or similar leather bands studded with metal fillings or razor blades; (4) stun guns; and (5) any spray or other device which projects, releases, or emits tear gas or any other substance intended to produce temporary physical discomfort of permanent injury through being vaporized or otherwise dispensed in the air. (BOE Policy 5131.7)
Any person who knowingly has in his possession any firearm in or upon any part of the buildings or grounds of any school, college, university, or other educational institution, without the written authorization of the governing officer of the institution, is guilty of a crime of the third degree, irrespective of whether he possesses a valid permit to carry the firearm or a valid firearms purchaser identification card. (BOE POLICY 5131.9, NJSA 2C:39-5)
Items such as studded belts/collars/bracelets, chains, large/heavy jewelry, etc. are prohibited in school. Any items that could be used as weapons are prohibited in school as deemed by the administration.

ASSAULT WITH A WEAPON
Any student who commits an assault upon a Board member or employee or another student, with a weapon, on any school property, on a school bus, or at a school-sponsored function shall be immediately removed from the school’s regular education program pending a suspension or expulsion hearing before the Board.  The student must be placed in an alternative educational placement pending a Board hearing to determine the student’s guilt.


SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Students who are suspected of or involved in the use of, possession of, or sale/distribution of alcohol or drugs are subject to disciplinary action which includes a mandatory drug screening, suspension, and police complaint.  (BOE POLICY 5131.6)


HARASSMENT, INTIMIDATION, BULLYING, BIAS
It is prohibited by law to commit an act of harassment/discrimination, intimidation or bullying and all such acts will result in an internal investigation submitted to central office. Refer to BOE Policy 5512 for more information. To report an act of Harassment, Intimidation, or Bullying (including hazing or cyberbullying) download a Reporting Form from the district or school website or contact Mr. Urbanovich at x2837.
CHEATING
The Board of Education has a strict policy on cheating to include incidents on homework, tests, exams, quizzes, labs, papers, etc. Consequences include the failing of an assignment, test, or exam. Continued incidents will result in the lowering of a marking period grade and potential removal from class with WF (no credit).  (BOE POLICY 6147.1)
STUDENT DISCIPLINE DISPOSITIONS
The actions taken by the administration to effectively deal with student discipline referral include the following:
   1. WARNING
Warnings are sometimes given for first time incidents which are considered minor. Such warnings usually set the stage for future action and serve to communicate expectations. Conferences may be held with the student, teacher (if involved), counselor, and/or parent.
   2. CENTRAL DETENTION
Central detention is assigned by an administrator as an initial step to curb behavior/conduct and to offer a consequence for the violation of school rules. These detentions are a means of avoiding suspension and offered as a deterrent. Teacher detentions serve a similar purpose. Serious matters, such as fighting, assault, weapons, drugs, etc. will result in suspension.
NOTE:  Central and teacher detention must always be served. Cutting will result in re-assigning detention and additional disciplinary action.
   3. SATURDAY DETENTION  
Saturday detention is also assigned by an administrator as a step to curb behavior/conduct and to offer a consequence for violation of school rules. Saturday detention is an administrative option to avoid suspension and is offered as a deterrent.
NOTE: Saturday detention must always be served. Cutting would result in reassigning the Saturday Detention and further disciplinary action.
   4. IN- SCHOOL SUSPENSION
In-school suspension (ISS) is assigned by an administrator as a consequence for the violation of school rules. Those students assigned in-school suspension are not permitted to participate in/attend school functions/activities on the day the ISS is served. In-school suspension is usually imposed after other disciplinary action has been utilized to deter continued problems; however, in-school suspension may be imposed as a first-time action as deemed necessary by an administrator.
________________
STUDENT DISCIPLINE DISPOSITIONS (cont.)
   5. OUT- OF- SCHOOL SUSPENSION
Out-of-school suspension can only be imposed by the Principal or designee.  This action is considered serious and is imposed after other disciplinary action has been utilized to deter continued problems.  In serious cases (fighting, drugs, etc.) suspension is imposed as a first-time action.  Continued disciplinary referrals may result in additional suspensions, assignment to the Alternate Program, and eventually a recommendation for an Administrative Hearing.
NOTE:  During the time of suspension, a student is not allowed on school property nor allowed to attend or   participate in any school activities home or away.  If the suspension includes a Friday or the last day before an extended break, this restriction is in effect for the weekend/break unless special permission is granted by administration.
   6. LONG-TERM SUSPENSION / POLICE REPORTS OR COMPLAINTS
In serious cases related to violent or criminal acts, the Principal can suspend up to 21 days with the Superintendent’s approval. The matter would be referred to the Superintendent of Schools with a police report or complaint.
   7. ALTERNATE PROGRAM
A program is set up for those students who have accumulated an excessive number of discipline referrals for a variety of reasons; these students demonstrate an inability to function in the regular school setting.  Students such as those who exhibit continued and willful disobedience are eligible, by law and Board Policy, for expulsion. With the Superintendent’s permission, the alternative program would provide an option for the administration, and the student, for one final opportunity to change behavior and to avoid expulsion. In addition to students accumulating an excessive number of discipline referrals, the Alternate Program is an option available to the administration for placement of students who have been charged with a serious offense.  Such offenses may include, but are not limited to, weapons, assaults, drugs/alcohol, etc.  Such decisions, however, are always based on a review of the incident itself, the nature or seriousness of the incident, and the student’s history.




STUDENT DISCIPLINE DISPOSITIONS (cont.)
   8. ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING
An Administrative Hearing is an option for the Superintendent of Schools in cases that are serious and warrant consideration of a possible Expulsion Hearing with the Board of Education. At an Administrative Hearing, conducted by the Superintendent or designee, each case is reviewed based on its own circumstances. The Superintendent may continue the case for an Expulsion Hearing, assign a student to the Alternate Program, return a student to school on probation, or impose another disposition. Administrative Hearings are reserved for such offenses as weapons, assaults, drugs/alcohol, etc.
   9. EXPULSION
Expulsion is the permanent removal from school and can only be imposed by the Board of Education after a full hearing as directed by the Superintendent of Schools.
   10. ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION
With the approval of the Principal, the administration reserves the right to impose disciplinary action in the disposition of cases that warrant special consideration. The administration, however, recognizes its responsibility and right to take reasonable and necessary disciplinary action, including possible police reports, for student behavior and conduct that is not specified above or in the code but is judged inappropriate by the administration. The student discipline code extends to all school-related functions both on and off school property (including away athletic contests) and is also in effect while students are en-route to and from school.
   11. STUDENTS WITH EDUCATIONAL DISABILITIES
       The discipline of students with educational disabilities must conform to the rules and regulations outlined in 
       NJAC 6:28-28 and the procedures established for the Edison School District. Be the Change 


DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE           
	FILE CODE:        5131
	

EDISON BOARD OF EDUCATION 
Pupils
EDISON, NEW JERSEY




CONDUCT / DISCIPLINE                                                        HIGH SCHOOL DISCIPLINE CODE


Category
	

First Action
	

Second Action
	

Third Action
	

Fourth Action
	Fifth And Subsequent Actions
	

A.        Insubordination


B.        Failure to Follow Procedures
	

Detention 1-3 days
	

Detention 1-3 days
	

Saturday detention 4 hours or suspension 1 day
	

Suspension 1-3 days/ parent-VP conference
	

Suspension 3-4 days/ parent-principal conference for Adm. action
	

C.        Inappropriate Conduct
	

Note:  Saturday detention or immediate suspension 1-4 days depending on the seriousness and intent)/parent-principal conference
	

D.        Cutting Teacher/ Central/Saturday Detention        
	

Detention 1 day and detention reassigned
	

Saturday detention 2 hours and detention reassigned
	

Saturday detention 4 hours and detention reassigned
	

Suspension 1-3 days and detention reassigned/ parent-VP conference
	

Suspension 3-4 days and detention reassigned/ parent- principal conference for administrative action
	

	

Note:  Cutting Saturday detention will result in suspension and reassignment of detention.
	

E.        Smoking or Chewing/ Smokeless Tobacco BOE Policy 3515
	

Saturday detention 4 hours optional smoking cessation program


	

Saturday detention 4 hours and Dept. of Health $25 fine or smoking cessation program
	

Suspension 1 day/Dept. of Health $50 fine
	

Suspension 3 days/ parent-VP conference/ Dept. of Health $75 fine
	

Suspension 4 days/ parent-principal conference/Dept. of Health $100 fine
	

F.        Cutting Class(es) and/or Assigned Locations as per BOE Policy 5113
	

Detention 1 day for each class/location cut up to a max. of 4 detentions
	

Saturday detention 2 hours - 1 or 2 classes cut/4 hours - 3+ classes cut
	

Suspension 1 day
	

Suspension 3 days/ parent-VP conference
	

Suspension 3-4 days/ parent-principal conference for administrative action
	

	

Note:  The BOE Policy 5113 on Student Class Cutting permits removal from class after 3 cuts 
in a full-year course (all others 2 cuts) with no option to attend summer school. 
	

G.        Tardiness to School as per BOE Policy 5113
	

Detention 1 day on the 6th occasion


	

Saturday detention 2 hours on the 8th occasion
	

Saturday detention 4 hours on the 10th occasion
	

Suspension 1 day/ parent-VP conference on the 12th occasion
	

Suspension 3 days/ parent-principal conference administrative action on subsequent occasions
	

Note:  The BOE Policy 5113 on Student Attendance permits an unexcused absence from
class if a student arrives after 15 minutes due to a tardiness to school.
	



DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE           
	FILE CODE:        5131
	EDISON BOARD OF EDUCATION
Pupils
EDISON, NEW JERSEY








Category
	

First Action
	

Second Action
	

Third Action
	

Fourth Action
	Fifth And Subsequent Actions
	

H.        Fighting as per BOE Policy 5131.5, 5114


	

Suspension 1-3 days/ parent-principal conference. 
	

Suspension 4 days/ referral to the Superintendent for extension to 10 days. 


	

Referral to the superintendent for possible formal Board hearing for long-term suspension/expulsion and/or placement in an alternate education setting.


Note:  Depending on the seriousness of the offense and the student's previous disciplinary record, a referral to the superintendent for possible hearing for long-term suspension/expulsion or placement in an alternate education setting may  result after the first or subsequent action as well.


	

I.        Vandalism


J.        Theft


K.        Gambling        
	

Suspension 1-3 days/ parent-VP conference police report or complaint
	

Suspension 4 days/ parent-principal conference police report or complaint
	

Referral to the superintendent for 5 to 10 days suspension.   Police report or complaint filed.
	

Referral to the superintendent for possible formal Board hearing for long-term suspension/expulsion and/or placement in an alternate education setting.


Note:  Depending on the seriousness of the offense and the student's previous disciplinary record, a referral to the superintendent for possible hearing for long-term suspension/expulsion or placement in an alternate education setting may  result after the first or subsequent action as well.


	

L.         Use of a Beeper (2C:33-19), Cell Phone or Paging Device, etc.  (All Electronic Communication Devices per Policy 5145.7)


	

Saturday detention 4 hours 
	

Suspension 1 day
	

Suspension 2 days/parent- Assist. Princ. conference
	

Referral to the superintendent for possible formal Board hearing for long-term suspension/expulsion and/or placement in an alternate education setting.


Note:  Depending on the seriousness of the offense and the student's previous disciplinary record, a referral to the superintendent for possible hearing for long-term suspension/expulsion or placement in an alternate education setting may  result after the first or subsequent action as well.


	M.        Assault (2C:12-1) (BOE Policy 5131 and 5131.5)


N.        Terroristic Threat (2C:12-3)
       (BOE Policy 5131.5)


O.        Sex Offense (BOE Policy 5131.5)
	

-  Offenses M-P will result in a suspension from school for up to 10 days with a referral to the Superintendent of Schools for possible placement in an alternate educational setting.  Police complaint will be signed.


-  Depending on the seriousness and intent or if directed at a staff member, charges of assault, terroristic threat, and sex offense will result in a suspension/expulsion hearing and a police complaint.  An assault on a staff member is considered aggravated assault (2C:12-1)
	



DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE           
	FILE CODE:        5131
	

EDISON BOARD OF EDUCATION        Pupils
EDISON, NEW JERSEY








Category
	

First Action
	

Second Action
	

Third Action
	

Fourth Action
	Fifth And Subsequent Actions
	

P.        Possession of a Weapon (BOE Policy 5131.7 and .9 2C:39-1 et seq., 58-6.1, 58-15, 18A:6.1, 23.4-16) 
	

Note:  It is illegal to possess mace in school.  Mace will be considered a weapon if discharged (2C:39-5)
	

Q.    Assault with a weapon




	

Any student who commits an assault upon a Board member or employee or another student, with a weapon, on any school property, on a school bus, or at a school-sponsored function shall be immediately removed from the school’s regular education program pending a suspension or expulsion hearing before the Board.  The student must be placed in an alternative educational placement pending a Board hearing to determine the student’s guilt.


     a.  “Weapon” means anything readily capable of lethal use or of inflicting serious bodily injury.
     b.  Students so removed, other than students with disabilities, shall be removed from the school’s general education program for a 
          period not exceeding one calendar year.  (N.J.A.C. 18A:37-8) 


  c.  The principal or his or her designee shall:
          (i)    Remove the student;
          (ii)   Isolate the student and place the student under the supervision of school staff until such time as the parent or law enforcement 
                 official takes custody of the student;
          (iii)  Immediately report the removal of the student to the Superintendent;
          (iv)  Notify the appropriate law enforcement agency of a possible violation of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice; and
          (v)   Notify the student’s parent of the following information:
   * The removal action;
   * The law enforcement notification;
   * The change of custody, if it occurs; and
   * The student’s due process rights (including a disabled student’s due process rights, as applicable).
     d.  The Board must conduct a hearing within 30 days of the student’s removal to determine whether the student committed the assault 
          with a weapon.  If found “not guilty” by the Board, the student must be returned to the regular education program.  The Board’s 
          determination must be made within five days of the hearing.
     e.  The Superintendent may modify the removal on a case-by-case basis.  The Superintendent shall make the final determination on 
          whether the general education student is prepared to return to the general education program or whether the student shall remain 
          in an alternative education program or receive home or other out-of-school instruction based on the following criteria:
   * The nature and severity of the offense;
   * The Board’s removal decision;
   * The results of any relevant testing, assessments or evaluation of the student; and
   * The recommendation of the principal or director of the alternative program or home or other out-of-school instruction program in which the student has been placed.


	________________


DISCIPLINE PROCEDURE           
	FILE CODE:        5131
	EDISON BOARD OF EDUCATION        Pupils
EDISON, NEW JERSEY






Category
	

First Action
	

Second Action
	

Third Action
	

Fourth Action
	Fifth And Subsequent Actions
	

R.    Alcohol/Drugs/
       Steroids - Possession, Use, Sale/Distribution and/or Involvement with as per BOE Policy 5131.6
	

-  NJAC 40A-4.1 and BOE Policy 5131.6 require mandatory drug screening and medical examination if a student is suspected of being 
   under the influence or involved with drugs/alcohol/steroids.


-  In the case of drugs/alcohol/steroids, an evaluation at an approved drug treatment center will be required with 
   any subsequent recommendations for therapy to be followed prior to any return to school.


-  Appropriate disciplinary action based on the nature and scope of the incident shall be taken in accordance with board policy on  suspension and  
   expulsion.


	

S.        Cheating as per BOE Policy 5131
	

F grade on assignment - test/counselor-student conference/principal letter
	

Same class:  F grade on assignment-test/MP grade lowered by one/parent-counselor- principal conference
	

Same class:  F grade assigned for the marking period/90 day suspension from co-curricular activities
	



	

	

Note:  BOE Policy 5131 calls for the assignment of an F for the course and 90-day co-curricular restriction if 
stealing of a quiz, test, or teacher manual is involved.


	

DISCIPLINE 
PROCEDURE  
FILE CODE: 5131
EDISON BOARD OF EDUCATION
Pupils
EDISON, NEW JERSEY




NOTE:        1.        With the approval of the superintendent, the administration reserves the right not to invoke the use of this code in the disposition of those referrals, which warrant special consideration.  The administration also recognizes its responsibility and right to take reasonable and necessary disciplinary action for student behavior and/or conduct that is not specified in this code but is judged inappropriate by the administration.  The student discipline code extends to all school-related functions both on and off school property and is also in effect while students are en route to and from school.
                2.        Students who accumulate several disciplinary referrals in one or more categories or who commit a serious offense that does not result in expulsion or other administrative action will be prohibited from participation/attendance in co-curricular activities.  For seniors in marking period 4, it could result in the loss of prom and/or graduation ceremonies.  
                3.        The discipline for students with educational disabilities must conform to the rules and regulations outlined in NJAC 6A:14-1 et. seq. and the procedures established for the Edison School District.
                4.        School authorities have the right to impose a consequence on a student for conduct away from school grounds, including on a school bus or at a         school-sponsored function that is consistent with the Board’s code of student conduct.






CENTRAL DETENTION RULES / GUIDELINES
   1. Central Detention runs from 2:40 – 3:55 p.m.
   2. Room assignment: Rooms 102, 110, 104 or other room as assigned.
   3. Students are to report promptly at 2:40 p.m.; if late or without a legitimate pass, the student will not be admitted to detention.  This will be considered a cut, and an additional detention and/or suspension will be assigned. 
   4. Students should bring work or other reading material and must remain quiet during detention.
   5. If a teacher assigns a personal detention on a day scheduled for Central Detention, students are to serve the teacher detention but must provide the assistant principal a note from the teacher verifying the detention.  The central detention would be reassigned.
   6. If a student is absent or suspended on a day scheduled for Central Detention, he/she will automatically be reassigned to the next available day.  Failure to serve the reassigned detention will be considered a cut; additional detentions and/or suspension will be imposed.
   7. If removed from Central Detention for any reason, additional detentions or suspension will be assigned. 


 SATURDAY DETENTION RULES / GUIDELINES


   1. Hours are 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., noon (4 hour session); 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., noon (2 hour session).
   2. Students must enter the building by the main entrance and report directly to the cafeteria.
   3. At the end of the detention period, students must exit the same way and immediately leave the premises.
   4. Students are responsible for their own transportation.
   5. Students who cut Saturday Detention may be suspended from school, and Saturday Detention will be reassigned as a Saturday Detention or multiple Central Detentions.
   6. Students who arrive late will not be accepted.
   7. Students who are absent due to illness must have a parent call the Assistant Principal’s office to leave a message (732-452-2836) and submit a written note on Monday.
   8. Students who come without the signed permission letter, whose behavior is unacceptable, or who do not follow the rules of Saturday Detention will be subject to disciplinary action, reassignment of Saturday Detention, and/or out of school suspension.
   9. Students must bring enough schoolwork or reading material to keep them busy during the detention period.  They must come prepared (pens, pencils, paper, etc.) since they will not be permitted access to their lockers.
   10. Once the detention period begins, students will not be permitted to leave.
   11. Sleeping is not permitted.
   12. No food or beverages are permitted.
   13. No radios, headphones, earbuds, cell phones, videos, computer games, or other prohibited items as outlined in the Student Handbook are permitted.
   14. No talking is permitted.
   15. All other school rules and regulations are in effect, including the dress code.
IN-SCHOOL DETENTION RULES / GUIDELINES


   1. Students report to in-school suspension room (room 200) at the start of homeroom.
   2. Students who miss any in-school suspension time due to early dismissal, tardiness, absence or emergency school closing will make-up the time missed on the next day of attendance.
   3. Restroom breaks are provided during periods 3 and 11 only. Students are not permitted to leave the classroom at any other time for any other reason.
   4. Students may eat lunch during period 8 in the in-school suspension room. Students may bring lunch or purchase lunch in the cafeteria. Students will be escorted to the cafeteria to purchase lunch during period 7.
   5. Students must bring all necessary materials to in-school suspension – no student will be able to go to a locker for any reason.
   6. All school rules apply in the in-school suspension room. Any student who is in violation of any school rule or behaves in a disrespectful or inappropriate manner throughout the in-school suspension, will be escorted by a Security Guard or Administrator to the main office where further consequences will result
   7. Students will remain seated in assigned seats and work on assignments; failure to work on assignments will result in further disciplinary action.
   8. Talking or interacting with other students, sleeping, lounging, eating or drinking at any time other than lunch is not allowed.
   9. Participation in or attendance at any extracurricular activity is not permitted on the day the ISS is served from the time the in-school suspension is assigned until the suspension is over and a meeting takes place with the student and an Administrator. The meeting with Administration must take place in order for student to resume activities.
   10. Students will remain in in-school suspension for the entire day. Dismissal from in-school suspension will take place when the bell rings at 2:30. Students with an Early Release on their schedule will be permitted to leave as usual one time only.




SUMMARY OF WEAPONS POLICY


FIREARMS


        The Board of Education prohibits the possession and/or use of firearms from school property, on a school bus, at any school function, or while en route to or from school or any school function. For the purpose of this policy and pursuant to the New Jersey Zero Tolerance For Guns Act, “firearms” include, but is not limited to, any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or semi-automatic rifle, or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a weapon from which may be fired or ejected any solid projectable ball, slug, pellet, missile or bullets, or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing, by means of a cartridge or shell or by the action of an explosive or the igniting of flammable or explosive substances. It shall also include, without limitation, any firearm which is in the nature of an air gun, spring gun or pistol or other weapon of a similar nature in which the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide, compressed or other gas or vapor, air or compressed air, or is ignited by compressed air, and ejecting a bullet or missile smaller than three-eighths of an inch in diameter with sufficient force to injure a person. Any pupil who is convicted or adjudicated delinquent for possession of a firearm or a crime armed with a firearm or found knowingly in possession of a firearm on any school property, on a school bus, or at a school-sponsored function shall be immediately removed from the school’s regular education program pending a hearing before the Board to remove the pupil from the regular education program for a period of not less than one calendar year.  A pupil may be expelled for violation of this policy.
        The principal/designee shall be responsible for the removal of such a pupil and shall immediately report the removal to the Chief School Administrator. The Chief School Administrator may modify a pupil’s removal on a case by case basis. The principal shall also notify the appropriate law enforcement agency of a possible violation of the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice.
        This policy shall not apply to any pupil who has obtained the written authorization of the Chief School Administrator to lawfully possess a firearm while participating in a school sponsored function.  Such authorization shall not be provided to any pupil who has been convicted or adjudicated delinquent for possession of a firearm or for a crime involving the use of a firearm.
        The Board must hold a hearing to determine whether the pupil is guilty of committing the charged offense within twenty-one (21) calendar days following the pupil’s removal from the regular education program. The hearing is not subject to the provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act. The Board must render a decision within five (5) days after the close of the hearing; and any appeal from the Board’s decision shall be made to the Commissioner of Education within ninety (90) days of such decision.  (See BOE POLICY 5131.7 and 5131.9)
        The Chief School Administrator shall determine whether the student is prepared to return to the regular education program or whether the pupil shall remain in an alternative education program, home instruction or other suitable facilities and program, in accordance with procedures to be established by the Commissioner of Education. The Chief School Administrator’s determination as to whether or when the pupil is prepared to return to the regular education program must be made in accordance with district procedures established pursuant to NJAC 6:26 et.seq., Intervention and Referral Services for General Education Pupils, in consultation with the principal or director of the alternative education school/program or other education placement, and in accordance with the conditions resulting from the Edison Board of Education hearing on the pupil’s placement is determined by the Child Study Team and the pupil’s parent(s) in accordance with NJAC 6:28 et. seq., Special Education.
        If the Board finds the pupil not guilty of the charged offense, the pupil must be immediately returned to the regular education program.
Suspension – A temporary exclusion from school, following due process procedures.
Removal – The exclusion of a pupil from the regular education program in the school to which the pupil was assigned for the purpose of being offered a thorough and efficient, free public education and assignment of the pupil to an alternative education school/program for at least one calendar year, following a proper  hearing conducted by the district Board of Education.
Expulsion – A permanent exclusion from school which denies a pupil the right to a free, thorough and efficient public education provided by the school district in which the pupil resides, based on specific conditions and following due process procedures, including a hearing conducted by the district Board of Education.


WEAPONS OTHER THAN FIREARMS
        The Board of Education prohibits the possession, use, or exchange of any weapons in any school building, on school grounds, at any school-sponsored event, and on school-sanctioned transportation except as the possession and use of a weapon is authorized by law and required in the performance of the possessor’s duty.
        For the purpose of this policy “weapon” means anything readily capable of lethal use or of inflicting serious bodily injury.  The term includes, but is not limited to, all (1) firearms, even though not loaded or lacking a clip or other component to render them immediately operable; (2) components which can be readily assembled into a weapon; (3) gravity knives, switchblade knives, daggers, dirks, stilettos, or pocket knives, billies, blackjacks, bludgeons, metal knuckles, sand clubs, slingshots, cesti or similar leather bands studded with metal fillings or razor blades; and (4) stun guns; and any weapon or other device which projects, releases, or emits tear gas or any other substance intended to produce temporary physical discomfort or permanent injury through being vaporized or otherwise dispensed in the air, except a “firearm” as defined by NJSA 2C:39-1f. 








WEAPONS OTHER THAN FIREARMS (cont.)
        Any pupil or school employee who has reasonable grounds to suspect the presence of a weapon prohibited by this policy shall immediately report his/her suspicion to the principal. The principal shall conduct an appropriate search and confiscate any weapon discovered in the course of the search. He/she shall, if appropriate and feasible, summon the aid of law enforcement officers in the conduct of the search. Any school employee who confirms the presence of a weapon under circumstances that place persons at serious risk may confiscate the weapon immediately and may use such force as is reasonable and necessary to obtain possession.        
Unless the weapon has been taken into custody by a law enforcement officer, the principal shall safeguard the weapon until a law enforcement officer takes custody of it. The principal will notify the Chief of Police of Edison that a weapon is present on school premises; the notice shall request removal of the weapon by an authorized law enforcement officer. The principal shall obtain and file a receipt for any weapon removed by a law enforcement officer. The principal shall immediately notify the superintendent of the incident and file a written report. A criminal complaint shall be filed against a student who has violated this policy. The board may also take any further legal action which is deemed appropriate.


        A pupil who commits a violation of this policy, or any regulation promulgated pursuant hereto (except an assault as stated below), shall be immediately suspended from school by the principal or his/her designee consistent with Board Policy #5114, Suspension and Expulsion. The superintendent shall report the suspension to the board at its next regular meeting. Any pupil who is charged with a violation of this policy shall be subject to a hearing before the Board of Education at the discretion of the Board of Education. Any disciplinary action for students with educational disabilities must conform to the rules and regulations outlined in NJAC 6:28-2.8, and the procedures established by the board.
        The board shall hold a hearing to determine whether a pupil is guilty as stated above within twenty-one (21) calendar days following the pupil’s removal from the regular education program. The hearing is not subject to the provisions of the Open Public Meeting Act. The board shall render a decision within five (5) days after the close of the hearing; and any appeal from the board’s decision shall be made to the commissioner of education within ninety (90) days of such decision.
        Any pupil or school employee who has knowledge of the presence of a weapon in violation of this policy and fails to report same shall be subject to disciplinary action.




SUMMARY OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY


        The Board of Education prohibits the use, possession, and/or distribution of alcohol, drugs, steroids and/or paraphernalia on school premises by pupils, at any event away from the school premises that is sponsored by the Board of Education and on any transportation vehicle provided by the Board of Education.  Pupils suspected of being under the influence of alcohol, drugs and/or steroids will be identified, evaluated, and reported in compliance with the provisions of the NJ Statues and Administrative Code regarding Substance Abuse Drug Free School Zones, Enforcement Code, and the Memorandum and Agreement between the Edison Township Board of Education and Middlesex County Prosecutors Office.
        Pupils, who use, consume, possess or distribute alcohol, drugs, steroids and/or paraphernalia in school or en route to/from school shall be subject to disciplinary action, which will include suspension from school and referral for prosecution.  
   1. IDENTIFICATION AND REFERRAL OF PUPILS INVOLVED WITH ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND/OR STEROIDS.
   1. A pupil is involved with alcohol, and drugs, or steroids when he or she possesses, distributes, uses and/or is under the influence in school or en route to/from school.
The Principal or Assistant Principal shall notify the pupil’s parent/guardian.
   2. A pupil’s person, effects or locker may be searched whenever a Principal or Assistant Principal has reasonable grounds to believe that alcohol, drugs, steroids and/or paraphernalia may be present.
   2. EVALUATION AND TREATMENT OF PUPILS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, DRUGS, AND/OR STEROIDS
   1. A pupil suspected of being under the influence of alcohol/drugs/steroids shall be examined immediately by a physician. The Principal or Assistant Principal shall immediately notify the parent/guardian of a pupil who appears to be under the influence (reasonable grounds). The Principal or Assistant Principal shall direct the parent/guardian to take the student for an immediate (within two hours) examination, which shall require the pupil provide a urine sample for a full-spectrum analysis.  The examination should be performed by a physician selected by the parent or guardian. If the chosen physician is not immediately available, the pupil shall be accompanied by designated school staff (made by the Principal) to the emergency room of the nearest hospital for examination. If available, a parent or guardian should also accompany the pupil.








SUMMARY OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY (cont.)


   2. If the pupil refuses to undergo the physical examination and provide the required urine sample within the allotted time period (2 hours) or if his or her parent or guardian refuse to permit the pupil to do so, it shall be presumed that the pupil was under the influence; and the pupil shall be immediately suspended from school in accordance with the Board of Education’s Substance Abuse Policy.
   3. A written report of the examination and verification that a drug screening of the pupil has been done shall be furnished by the examining physician to the parent(s) or guardian(s), the Principal and to the Superintendent within 24 hours. The cost for all private examinations is the responsibility of the parent(s) or guardian(s).  Costs of emergency medical evaluation and treatment performed at the nearest hospital facility will be assumed by the parent/guardian. If the written report of the medical examination is not submitted to the parent/guardian, Principal and Superintendent within 24 hours, the pupil may be allowed to return to school until such time when urine screen request is provided.
SUMMARY OF HARASSMENT, INTIMIDATION, AND BULLYING POLICY
It is the policy of the Edison Township Board of Education to maintain a positive and inviting learning and working environment, free from harassment. No one, including pupils, employees, vendors, volunteers, or visitors, shall commit an act of harassment/discrimination, intimidation or bullying of any kind prohibited by law.
   1.  SEXUAL HARASSMENT


        Sexual harassment is defined as a repeated pattern of unprovoked aggressive sexual behaviors of a physical and/or psychological nature carried out by an individual or a group against an individual or a group with the effect of causing harm or hurt. 
        Sexual harassment occurs if a teacher attempts to make a pupil submit to unwelcome sexual demands or overtures as a condition of a pupil’s evaluation, promotion, opportunities, privileges and/or other benefits of education.
        Sexual harassment also occurs when one person harasses another solely because of the victim’s gender.  This type of sexual harassment may involve unwelcome sexual demands or overtures, but it may also take the form of other harassing conduct not necessarily sexual in nature. If a “reasonable person” of the victim’s gender would consider the conduct intimidating, hostile, or as creating an offensive working environment for an employee, then sexual harassment has occurred. Such conduct often consists of unwelcome sexual touching and comments. For example, such conduct may include:


SEXUAL HARASSMENT (cont.)
   * physical contact such as hugging another or placing one’s arm around the other;
   * sexual flirtations, advances, and propositions;
   * sexually degrading words used in reference to an individual;
   * comments on the speaker’s own sexual abilities or those of co-workers or students;
   * display of offensive pictures or objects such as posters or calendars which are of a sexual nature;
   * teasing, jokes and remarks of a sexual nature;
   * comments of a sexual nature on, or staring at, an individual’s physical attributes;
   * questions about sexual conduct;
   * repeated requests for a date after prior requests have been refused, or the proposed invitee has stated that he or she is not interested in such social contact;
   * pressure for sexual favors;
   * e-mails or electronic bulletin boards and/or web sites containing offensive or sexual language or pictures; and
   * other harassment of a non-sexual nature that is engaged in due to the gender of the individual.


Any pupil who has knowledge of, or feels victimized by, sexual harassment shall immediately report his/her allegations to any one of the following:  any teaching staff member, school counselor, assistant principal, or Principal.
   2. HARASSMENT, INTIMIDATION, AND BULLYING
The Board acknowledges that a safe and civil environment in school is necessary for students to learn and achieve high academic standards.  Harassment, intimidation, or bullying, like other disruptive or violent behaviors, is conduct that disrupts both a student’s ability to learn and a school’s ability to educate its students in a safe environment. Since students learn by example, employees, staff members, vendors, or visitors, and students themselves must demonstrate appropriate behavior, treat others with civility and respect, and refuse to tolerate harassment, intimidation, or bullying.
        As stated in Policy 5512, the Board prohibits engagement in any act or behavior of harassment, intimidation, or bullying towards others on school property, via social media at any time (cyber-bullying), at school-sponsored functions, or on a school bus.  Harassment, intimidation or bullying means any gesture or written, verbal or physical act that is reasonably perceived as being motivated either by any actual or perceived characteristic, such as race, color, religion, ancestry, national, origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, or a mental, physical or sensory handicap, or by any other distinguishing characteristic, that takes place on school property, at any school-sponsored function or on a school bus and that:
   1. A reasonable person should know, under the circumstances, will have the effect of harming a person or damaging the student’s property, or placing a person in reasonable fear of harm to his person or damage to his property; or
   2. Has the effect of insulting or demeaning any person or group of people in such a way as to cause substantial disruption in, or substantial interference with, the orderly operation of the school.
        The consequences and discipline for a person who commits an act of harassment, intimidation, or bullying, or who engage in acts of retaliation against a person who reports such an action are presented in Policy #5131.
        Some acts of harassment, intimidation or bullying may be isolated incidents requiring that the school respond appropriately to the individuals committing the acts. Other acts may be so serious or parts of a larger pattern of harassment, intimidation or bullying that they require a response either at the classroom, school building or school district levels or by law enforcement officials.
        A school employee, student, volunteer, vendor, or visitor who has witnessed harassment, intimidation, or bullying, or has reliable information that someone has been subject to harassment, intimidation or bullying, must promptly report the incident to the building principal or the principal’s designee.
        
STUDENTS SHOULD REPORT ALL HARRASSMENT, INTIMIDATION AND BULLYING TO A TEACHER, COUNSELOR OR ADMINISTRATOR IMMEDIATELY.
________________


THE CO-CURRICULAR PROGRAM
        John P. Stevens High School has developed and has maintained a co-curricular and interscholastic athletic program designed to meet the diverse needs and interests of its students.  Students are encouraged to participate in these programs in order to provide balance to their high school educational experiences.  However, participating students must maintain a standard of academic performance that is consistent with the educational goals and objectives of the district and must be eligible to participate in accordance to Edison Board of Education Policy #6145 and the New Jersey Interscholastic Athletic Association (NJSIAA) guidelines.  STUDENTS ASSIGNED CENTRAL/SATURDAY DETENTION OR IN-SCHOOL SUSPENSION WILL NOT BE ALLOWED TO PARTICIPATE IN ANY CO-CURRICULAR/SPORTS ACTIVITY ON THE DETENTION DAY UNTIL THE DETENTION IS SERVED. DETENTIONS ARE NOT RESCHEDULED TO ACCOMMODATE PARTICIPATION IN ATHLETICS/CO-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES.


HOW TO JOIN AN ACTIVITY OR SPORT 
        Sign-up meetings are well publicized within the school for all sports and activities. An Activity Fair is held annually in the cafeteria after school early in the year. Advisors and club members are available to give out information regarding their activity, and students may join at this time. Athletics requires additional steps in order to participate (see pages 73 - 76). Anytime throughout the year, advisors and coaches may be sought out for information. They are happy to hear from you. For more information, see the assistant principal who coordinates co-curricular activities.


CO-CURRICULAR CLUBS
STUDENT GOVERNMENTS
Student Council  (9-12)
Senior Class Council
Junior Class Council
Sophomore Class Council
Freshman Class Council


SCHOOL/COMMUNITY SERVICE
Environmental Awareness Club
	PERFORMING GROUPS
Improv. Group
Instrumental Music Groups
International Thespians
Orchestra
Spoken Word Poetry Club
Theatre Company
Vocal Music Groups
	Library Aides Club
H.A.W.K.S.
JPawS
Bridges
Interact
Key Club


	PUBLICATIONS
Newspaper – Hawkeye
Literary Magazine – INK!
Yearbook – Regalis




ACADEMIC COMPETITION
	ACADEMIC PURSUITS
Academy of Science
Art Club
Chemistry Club
Family        Community, Career Leaders of America
Future Business Leaders of America
New Jersey Junior Classical League
	Robotics
Science Olympiad
Odyssey of the Mind
Science League
Math League
Model UN
Debate Club
	                                                                                        
NOTE:   Clubs and activities may be subject to change.


STUDENT COUNCIL
        The Student Council is an organization through which students may express their opinions, assist in the administration of the school, and participate in the management of school enterprises. The council promotes leadership, school spirit, and initiative among its members. Each spring a slate of officers are elected to carry on the work the following year. In the fall, representatives are selected to bring to the council’s attention complaints and suggestions from their classmates and to take to their homerooms the actions of the council.  In order to have an effective student council, representatives must approach their duties in a serious manner.
HONOR SOCIETIES
NATIONAL HONOR SOCIETY
        The qualifications for the National Honor Society are scholarship, service to school or community, leadership ability, and good character. A Faculty Council will evaluate the qualifications of each student before he or she is accepted for membership. Students must provide evidence of active participation in a variety of activities. They must also exhibit leadership ability by successfully holding any office or by assuming responsibility and demonstrating initiative in school or community activities. In addition, the Faculty Council will consider a student’s failure to follow school policies with regard to tardiness, absenteeism, discipline, and academic honesty. Those students successfully meeting requirements will be inducted into the National Honor Society in the spring of each year.


WORLD LANGUAGE HONOR SOCIETIES
        Students enrolled in the fourth or fifth level of the study of the same world language shall become eligible for membership. Students enrolled in French/Latin/Spanish IV-1, IV-H, V-AP, or V-1 must have attained a minimum non-weighted average of A- (3.67) in the previous two years of study. Students must have attained an overall, non-weighted GPA of B (3.0). New members shall be inducted in October of each school year.




HONOR SOCIETIES (cont.)
NATIONAL ART HONOR SOCIETY
        The National Art Honor Society publicly acknowledges a select number of high school students who have achieved a level of excellence. The selection signifies that through their effort, attitude, and sense of dedication in the field of art, they have consistently demonstrated the highest qualities in art scholarship, service, and character. In exemplifying these qualities as a creative individual, the students have made a valuable contribution to their school, community, and society. Membership in the Society is based upon art, scholarship, service, and character. The students are honored and inducted at an annual ceremony.
SCIENCE NATIONAL HONOR SOCIETY
        This society provides recognition to high achieving students who endeavor to quench their thirst for scientific knowledge and possibly pursue careers pertaining to science. However, SNHS is also real world experiences. The officers and advisors wish to provide their new members opportunities to experience a mélange of different scientific experiences from trips to activities to community service opportunities.  Members will be required to take an active role in the club and to keep up the standards which first allowed them entry (B+ average in high school and having been in at least one honors science course).
        Applicants will be accepted based on exemplary academics, an active role in the community and their continuing interest in science. Students are encouraged to include with the application any material that pertains to the application, such as certificates.  Also, they will be required to have a science teacher fill out the teacher recommendation form.  The applicants will be reviewed by a committee and notified of their status.
SOCIAL STUDIES HONOR SOCIETY
        Juniors and seniors are eligible for membership. Students must have attained a minimum non-weighted GPA of 3.65 and a cumulative history grade of A- (3.67). Students must submit a writing sample and a signature of recommendation from the current history teacher.
ENGLISH HONOR SOCIETY
        The National English Honor Society (NEHS) recognizes outstanding student performance in the discipline of English. Candidates who are in the top 20 percent of their class, who have achieved an “A-“ average in English, and who have successfully completed at least one year in an honors English class by junior and/or senior year are eligible to be nominated for membership into NEHS. English teachers, along with advisors, review eligible nominees before extending an invitation into the John P. Stevens’ chapter of the NEHS.  
NATIONAL TECHNICAL HONOR SOCIETY
        The National Technical Honor Society (NTHS) recognizes outstanding student performance in the discipline of Technology. Candidates who are in the top 20 percent of their class, who have achieved an “A-“ average in Technology related courses are eligible to be nominated for membership into NTHS.  Technology teachers, along with advisors, review eligible nominees before extending an invitation into the John P. Stevens chapter of the NTHS.  
NATIONAL MATHEMATICS HONOR SOCIETY
The Mathematics Honor Society recognizes outstanding student performance in the discipline of Mathematics. Candidates who are in the top 20 percent of their class, who have achieved an “A–” average in Mathematics related courses are eligible to be nominated for membership into MHS. Mathematics teachers, along with advisors, review eligible nominees before extending an invitation into the John P. Stevens chapter of the MHS. 
INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC TEAMS


                                        ACTIVITIES OFFERED                        TEAM/LEVELS
FALL                                        Football                                        9, 10, JV, Varsity
                                        Boys Soccer                                        9, JV, Varsity
                                        Girls Soccer                                        9, JV, Varsity
                                        Boys Cross Country                                Varsity
                                        Girls Cross Country                                Varsity
                                        Girls Tennis                                        JV, Varsity
                                        Girls’ Volleyball                                9,JV, Varsity
WINTER                                Boys Basketball                                9, JV, Varsity
                                        Girls Basketball                                9, JV, Varsity
Wrestling                                9, JV, Varsity
                                        Boys & Girls Winter Track                        Varsity
                                        Boys Bowling                                        Varsity
                                        Girls Bowling                                        Varsity
                                        Ice Hockey                                        Varsity
SPRING                                Baseball                                        9, JV, Varsity
                                        Softball                                        9, JV, Varsity
                                        Boys Spring Track                                9, Varsity
                                        Girls Spring Track                                Varsity
                                        Golf                                                Varsity
                                        Boys Tennis                                        JV, Varsity
                                        Boys’ Volleyball                                9,JV, Varsity
                                        Boys’ Lacrosse                                        JV, Varsity
                                        Girls’ Lacrosse                                        JV, Varsity
The interscholastic athletics program and the club and activity offerings may vary from year to year depending upon students’ interests, the availability of faculty advisors, or budgetary constraints.
PHYSICALS AND PERMISSION FORMS
To participate in athletics, students must complete a sports participation questionnaire and certificate, required for each sport played, and submit a completed physical examination form and health history form, in order to practice or play an interscholastic sport. Parents must also complete a section of this form. The form is available in the Athletic Office/Nurse’s Office. All completed forms must be submitted to the school nurse.  The physical exam must be completed yearly.  Forms must be submitted by August 1 for Fall participation.
NOTE:  If a student submits a false medical form, he/she will be subject to disciplinary action and will forfeit athletic participation for the season.


ELIGIBILITY


In order to participate in the co-curricular program, students must meet certain eligibility requirements and must have no outstanding financial obligations. In addition, students must be in attendance on any day they are scheduled to participate in an after-school or evening activity.
A.          The following Eligibility Requirements must be met for student participation in interscholastic athletics and other co-curricular activities:
   1. Students must adhere to the rules and regulations regarding conduct and attendance.
   2. For participation in the first semester (September to January) of grades 10 thru 12 students must have earned 32.5 credits (25% of the 130 credits required for graduation).  These credits must have been earned during the preceding school year, including summer school.
   3. For participation in the second semester (February to June) of grades 10 thru 12, students must be passing the equivalent of 32.5 credits during the first semester.
   4. Grade 9 students entering high school after promotion from the middle school are eligible for the fall semester.
   5. If students earn more than three-quarters of the credits required for graduation by the end of grade 11, they may be eligible in the second semester of the senior year even if they carry less than 25% of the credits required for graduation during their senior year.
B.        Additional NJSIAA Regulations for interscholastic athletics only:
   1. ELIGIBLE if a student has not reached the age of 19 prior to September 1.
   2. ELIGIBLE immediately if transfer because of a change of residence to another public secondary school district by parents or as approved by the Executive Committee.
   3. ELIGIBLE after thirty (30) days from the first game/meet of a sport at present school, if a student received a varsity award at previous school the previous year and transferred from one school to another when parents have not moved from one public school district to another public school district and only after “Transfer Waiver Form” has been completed and processed by both schools.  (NOTE:  Not eligible prior to the 30 days from first game/meet.)
   4. ELIGIBLE if no influence used to retain or recruit the student.
   5. ELIGIBLE to represent his/her present school if a student’s parents move to another public school district maintaining a secondary school of equal grade or higher provided he/she remains properly enrolled, any subsequent transfer will be subject to the transfer provisions.
   6. NOT ELIGIBLE after the completion of 8 semesters following a student’s entrance into the 9th grade.
   7. NOT ELIGIBLE after the class in which a student originally enrolled graduates, regardless of transfers during the 3 or 4 year period.


ELIGIBILITY APPEALS


Appeals regarding eligibility for participation in interscholastic athletics and activities will be processed in accordance with Board Policy 6145.1/6145.2. Appeals regarding an exception to the requirements established by NJSIAA must be processed in accordance with the rules and regulations of that organization and in cooperation with the school administration. These policies and rules are available by request through the administration or the Athletic Supervisor.


INTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC CONTRACT


All students who would like to participate in the Interscholastic Athletic Program at John P. Stevens High School must sign a contract with their parents which states the eligibility and physical examination requirements, reasons for dismissal and suspension from squad, and general rules of participation. This contract is part of the Board of Education policy and is included in all athletic physical form packets.


The expectations for student-athletes at John P. Stevens High School are high and are sometimes referred to as the double-standard rule since student-athletes are held to higher standards than non-athletic participants. Student-athletes are expected to maintain the same high level of self-discipline, academic performance, attendance, behavior, and conduct as they do on the field of play. Student-athletes who do not meet these expectations on the field of play, in the classroom and school, and in the community will jeopardize their opportunity to participate in athletics.
SPORTSMANSHIP CREED
These are high school athletes who are performing here tonight. They are friendly rivals as members of the opposing teams. They are not enemies. This basically, is the theme of interscholastic athletics, the idea of friendly competition. The visiting team tonight, and in every interscholastic game, is a guest of the home team.  They are expected to be so regarded and so treated. The officials are people who, by agreement between competing teams, are assigned by the Greater Middlesex Conference to administer the rules of the game. Their experience and their integrity qualify them for their part in this friendly interscholastic contest.
This attitude of sportsmanship should be reflected by all spectators, too, no matter what their personal feelings of loyalty may be to one or the other of the teams in tonight’s contest.
Excellence and harmony for students


EQUIPMENT
Anytime a student is issued equipment, he or she is responsible for the maintenance of that equipment and handing it in at the conclusion of an activity.  Fines will be assessed for all damaged or lost equipment.

ATHLETIC TRAINER
J. P. Stevens High School employs the services of a full-time athletic trainer. The trainer is responsible for the training room and will advise students on the care and prevention of athletic injuries.
FUNDRAISERS


During the course of the school year, fund raisers are sponsored by a number of clubs/classes/athletic teams.  Students may not be involved in the sale of any item unless it is an approved fundraising activity. Sales of any food/beverages are restricted to the cafeteria. Candy sales are prohibited during the school day; they may occur outside of school.
Students who participate in class fundraisers are credited for their individual sales so that their costs towards class expenses, (such as proms, yearbook, cap and gown, etc.) may be defrayed. The exact determination is made by each class with the approval of the administration.  
CO-CURRICULAR PARENT GROUPS


BAND PARENTS
A formally organized, incorporated group of parents that meet monthly for the express purpose of providing all kinds of assistance, financial and otherwise, to the J. P. Stevens High School band program. Membership is open to anyone with an interest in this program and contact can be made through the office of the band director. 
PTSO/PROJECT GRADUATION
The John P. Stevens High School PTSO/Project Graduation is a volunteer organization consisting of interested parents, teachers, and students. The PTSO/Project Graduation’s primary function is to support the school in an effort to enhance student life at J. P. Stevens. A special group that meets monthly, fund raises to support Project Graduation – an alcohol-free party that follows the June graduation.
ATHLETIC PARENTS
Each athletic team is supported by its own parent group. To find out information about any of the organizations, contact the Head Coach of the sport or the Supervisor of Athletics.
CHORAL/ORCHESTRA PARENTS – COPA
A formally organized group of parents that meets monthly for the purpose of providing assistance, financial and otherwise, to the J. P. Stevens High School choral and orchestra programs. Membership is open to anyone with an interest in this program and contact can be made through the office of the choral or orchestra directors.
THEATER ARTS PARENTS
A formally organized group of parents that meets for the purpose of providing assistance to the students and directors of the fall play and the spring musical. Membership is open to anyone with an interest in the program.  Contact can be made through the office of the theater director. 
                
SCHOOL BUS SAFETY


School bus safety is a matter for parent and pupil cooperation.  Safety on the school bus is not solely the responsibility of the administration and bus driver.  Safety is a matter of teamwork and requires the constant support and attention of the pupils and the parents as well as the school’s personnel.  Statistics show that the majority of school bus accidents are caused by human error rather than a mechanical failure.
The purpose of these guidelines is to clarify for the parent and pupil their responsibility in contributing to the safety of the school program.
“A PUPIL MAY BE EXCLUDED FROM THE BUS FOR DISCIPLINARY REASONS by the Principal, and his parents shall provide for his transportation to and from school during the time of his exclusion”.  Title 18A:25-2.


BUS RULES
   1. Students may only ride the bus to which they are assigned.
   2. Students must present a bus pass upon boarding the bus to which they are assigned.
   3. Do not damage any part of the bus.  Any damage to a bus should be reported immediately to the driver.
   4. In case of a road emergency, remain in your seat until instructions are given by the driver.
   5. Keep your books, packages, coats, and all other objects out the aisles. A clear passage to the emergency must always be present.
   6. Do not open or close windows without permission of the driver.
   7. Never throw articles from the bus windows.
   8. Be absolutely quiet when approaching a railroad crossing.
   9. Smoking is not permitted on the school bus.
   10. Learn how to get off the bus quickly in case of an emergency.
   11. Be courteous and considerate.  Use no profane language.
   12. Do not eat or drink on the bus.
   13. Keep the bus clean.
   14. Cooperate with the driver.
   15. Stay in your seat.
   16. Keep head, hands and feet inside the bus.
   17. Do not fight, push or shove.  No horseplay.
   18. Do not tamper with bus equipment.
   19. Do not bring items prohibited by the school on the school bus such as animals, pets, radios, tape players, electronic listening devices, water pistols, weapons of any type, skateboards, lighters, tobacco products, etc.  Consult your Assistant the day prior if you wish to carry something in question on the bus.
   20. Do not bring flammable material on the bus.
   21. The bus driver is authorized to assign seats as he/she deems necessary.


STUDENT PARKING
Parking areas for students are located outside the art and music wing (seniors) and adjacent to Polansky Park across Grove Avenue (juniors). Students are not allowed in the parking areas without prior permission. Students are not permitted to park in the faculty parking spaces.
   1. Students must register their cars in order to park in the student parking lots. Registration forms are available in the Attendance Office. Upon completion, return forms to the attendance office.
   2. Plastic decals that hang from the rearview mirror will be issued. These are interchangeable in the event a student uses a different car. However, students may not allow another student to borrow the decal.
   3. If a decal is lost, there will be a $5.00 replacement charge.
   4. Students on Early Release may not return to school prior to the 2:30 p.m. dismissal. If they are involved in sports, parking in the faculty lot outside the music wing is not permitted until after the 2:30 p.m. dismissal.
   5. Students must park within the lines designating a parking spot.
   6. Students must abide by the posted speed limits and signs on campus.
   7. Students driving to school are to keep the parking area clean. Garbage receptacles have been provided.  Cooperation is expected from everyone.
   8. Parking on campus is a privilege. This privilege may be lost as the result of disciplinary action. 
TRANSPORTATION FOR MEDICAL PROBLEMS
A parent who requests medical transportation for a student, must obtain a “Physician’s Form for Medical Transportation” from the school nurse. This form is to be completed by the student’s attending physician and returned to the school nurse. The school nurse will then forward this form and necessary paper work to the appropriate administrator who will contact the District Medical Examiner who will evaluate each request. The District Medical Examiner may request an examination of the student. If the District Medical Examiner denies request for medical transportation, the parent/guardian will be notified in a letter. If the District Medical Examiner approves medical transportation, all forms will be forwarded to the Transportation Department who will then arrange for medical transportation and inform parents of specific procedures.






CAFETERIA RULES


The cafeteria makes available both hot and cold lunches, a-la-carte items, sandwiches and snacks.  Students may also bring their own lunches. Food can only be purchased during an assigned lunch period.
The following rules have been established for the cafeteria during the lunch periods:
   1. Students are expected to be on time to lunch, stand in line, and wait their turn.
   2. Students must pay for their lunch; a debit program is also available. Free and reduced lunch applications are available on opening day through homeroom.
   3. All students are responsible for keeping the cafeteria clean.
   4. Refuse must be disposed of in the proper receptacles. Plastic bottles and cans must be disposed of in the recycling receptacles.
   5. Students are expected to use good table and eating manners.
   6. Stealing food/drink will result in suspension and restitution.
   7. Sitting at the outside picnic tables is a senior privilege. Misbehavior will result in the loss of this privilege.
   8. Students are required to follow the reasonable directives of any staff member; this includes disposing of any refuse that might not be “their own”.
   9. Students will be dismissed at the end of the lunch period by section as directed by the teacher in charge.
   10. Students are not permitted to carry food or drink out of the cafeteria. Food and drink must be packed away before exiting the cafeteria. If it is visible, the student will be asked to deposit the items in the garbage even if it has not been opened.
   11. Students are not permitted to have glass bottles in their possession.
   12. Failure to comply with the cafeteria rules will result in disciplinary action which could include cafeteria clean-up details, detentions, or suspension.
NOTE:  Students who wish to be excused from taking part in lunch in the cafeteria for religious reasons should seek the approval of the administration.




DEBIT ACCOUNT SYSTEM
The lunch program runs on a computerized system. Each student is given a debit account. Parents have the option to deposit money into the account so that students can purchase food items with a PIN number. At meal time, the student enters his or her assigned PIN number into the system through a key pad located on the lunch line. The amount of money needed to purchase the food is deducted automatically from the account. The computer asks for the purchase price in the event that there is no money placed on the account. This amount must be paid for at the time of purchase as there is no credit extended on these accounts.  Lunch prices will be determined and posted in September. To ensure security of the account, students should not share PIN numbers.  Any student who uses another student’s PIN will be subject to disciplinary action.


FREE OR REDUCED LUNCH
On opening day in homeroom, all students are given an application for free or reduced lunch. These forms must be completed by everyone. All forms are reviewed to determine eligibility. Eligibility requirements and criteria are explained on the application. Free and Reduced Lunch is not transferable; students are not allowed to use another student’s PIN number. Any student who uses another student’s PIN will be subject to disciplinary action.

VENDING MACHINES
Juice/soda and snack machines are located in the team rooms, PE locker rooms, cafeteria, and in the corridor by the cafeteria. These machines are available for use before and after school only. Students may not take juice outside of locker rooms. All students must cooperate in the proper disposal of juice/soda bottles after consumption. Students are urged to cooperate in eliminating problems so all students can continue to enjoy the advantages of the vending machines.
   1. Food and drink should not be consumed during passing time or class time. Snacks and beverages should be kept out of sight. To stop, for example, at a locker and take a drink would be acceptable. However, to walk the halls with an open container or package while drinking/eating is not permitted. 
   2. A simple rule would be to keep beverages and snacks out of sight. If a student carries a beverage, he/she should keep it in a bag until lunch or after school. Glass bottles are not allowed.
   3. Empty bottles and snack wrappers are sometimes deposited on the floors. There are enough garbage receptacles for easy access. All students must cooperate by keeping the school clean and free of garbage. Use the garbage cans and recycle bins.
   4. Candy sales are not permitted during the school day. Any class/club selling candy must do so before/after school. Boxes of candy in school will be confiscated and will result in the cancellation of the fundraiser.


HEALTH SERVICES


The Nurse’s Office is located on the first floor near the Main office. All students who become ill during school hours should report to the Nurse’s Office after obtaining a pass from their regularly scheduled teacher.  DO NOT GO TO A LAVATORY IF YOU ARE ILL. DO NOT USE YOUR CELL PHONE TO CONTACT PARENT(S) DIRECTLY. Students, who remain in a lavatory or use cell phone without permission, rather than reporting to the Nurse because they are ill, will be subject to disciplinary action.
        
Students who report to the Nurse’s Office must SIGN IN AND OUT. The school nurse will decide whether the student should be sent home. Parent will be notified and authorization given for the student to sign out in the Attendance Office. The absence due to illness is an unexcused absence.  (See section entitled “Attendance”.)

On opening day in the homeroom, students are given an EMERGENCY CARD which must be completed and signed by the parent. These cards are kept on file in the Nurse’s Office in the event an emergency arises and the parent must be contacted. Students who do not return these completed cards in a timely manner will be subject to disciplinary action.


MEDICATION / SUPPLEMENTS
Medication or supplements shall be administered by the school nurse (or by a school administrator, in an emergency,) only on the written order of the family physician and a written request from the parent/guardian.  The order from the physician shall include diagnosis, dosage of medication or supplements, time(s) of day medication or supplements are to be administered and duration of the physician’s order which will indicate the time period over which the medication or supplements are to be administered in the school and the possible side effects of the medication or supplements.
Medication or supplements shall be delivered to the school nurse by the parent or guardian or other designated adult in a labeled prescription bottle. STUDENTS MAY NOT CARRY ANY TYPE OF MEDICATION OR SUPPLEMENTS ON THEIR PERSON IN SCHOOL. Medication or supplements shall be kept in a locked closet or drawer in the nurse’s office. A list of all pupils receiving medications or supplements and the dosages and times for administering the medications or supplements shall be kept in the health office with the medication log. Medication/Supplements include all prescribed and over-the-counter medicine and health supplements such as vitamins, diet pills, weight gainers, fat burners, muscle enhancements, and any other pills/medication. Medication shall not be self-administered by a pupil except as follows:
A pupil may be permitted to self-administer medication for asthma or another potentially life-threatening illness as certified by the prescribing physician provided that the parent/guardian presents a written authorization for the administration of the medication to the Board of Education.
Life-threatening illness means an illness or condition that requires an immediate response to specific symptoms that if left untreated may lead to potential loss of life, such as, but not limited to, the use of an inhaler to treat an asthma attack or the use of an adrenaline injection to treat a potential anaphylactic reaction.  Parents/guardians of the pupil must meet the following conditions:
   1. Provide the board with written authorization for the pupil’s self-administration of medication.  This must be done annually.
   2. Provide written certification from the pupil’s physician that the pupil has asthma, allergies, or another potentially life-threatening illness and is capable of and has been instructed in the proper method of self-administration of medication, including Epi-Pens;
   3. Sign a statement acknowledging that the district shall incur no liability as a result of any injury arising from the self-administration of medication by the pupil and that the parents/guardians shall indemnify and hold harmless the district and its employees or agents against any claims arising out of the self-administration of medication by the pupil.
A pupil’s privilege of self-administering medication may be revoked when the pupil has failed to comply with this policy and the tenets of the agreement to self-medicate as provided herein. The privilege of a pupil to self-administer medication shall be terminated only after school officials, including the school district physician and the school nurse, consult with the pupil, the pupil’s parent/guardian, and the pupil’s physician.
The Edison Township School District shall incur no liability as a result of any injury arising from the self-administration of medication by the pupil. 
ELEVATOR
An elevator is located downstairs near room 124 and upstairs near room 226. The elevator is only for the use of disabled or injured students who have submitted a doctor’s note to the school nurse. Only an administrator or the school nurse may authorize the use of the elevator.  Students who are permitted to use the elevator will be given an elevator key that must be picked up in the Nurse’s Office each morning and returned to the Nurse’s Office before dismissal each afternoon until the student no longer requires the use of the elevator.  If a student allows others to use the key, or the elevator, the student will be subject to disciplinary action.  If the key is lost, the student will be charged a $5.00 replacement fee.
________________


LIBRARY MEDIA CENTER
The Library Media Center is open for students from 7:30 a.m. – 4:00 p.m. each school day. Periodically it will be necessary to close the Library Media Center.  Students should listen carefully to the morning announcements for such closings.
Students are encouraged to visit the Library Media Center to work on class assignments, to use the computers and online databases for curriculum related research, to circulate both class-related and recreational reading materials, and to use current periodicals (magazines and newspapers) of interest.
The following are the procedures and guidelines for students using the Library Media Center: 
   1. Students who wish to use the library during study hall must obtain a pass from one of their subject or study hall teachers.  Substitutes may not issue passes to students.
   2. Students must report to study hall for attendance and for the study hall teacher’s signature.
   3. Upon entering the library, students must present an appropriate pass and sign in.
   4. Students may use the library’s lavatory pass and must sign out/in.  Students may not leave the library for any reason without permission of librarian, teacher or secretary.
   5. Students are to remain in the library until the period ends.
   6. At the end of the day, pass stubs will be placed in study hall and subject teachers’ mailboxes for attendance verification.
   7. Students may come to the library for a maximum of three days per week.  Students abusing library privileges will be sent back to study hall and risk being barred from the library indefinitely.
   8. Student identification cards are needed to check out all library materials.
   9. Books circulate for two weeks.  A fine of 5 cents is charged for each school day the book is overdue.
   10. Reference books and magazines are available to circulate at the end of the school day for overnight use and are due prior to period 1 the next school day.
   11. Library materials will not be circulated to any student who has an outstanding book fine.
   12. It is prohibited for anyone to remove materials from the library without checking them out at the circulation desk.  Any violation of this type will be reported to Administration as a theft.
   13. Students may use the student copier at a rate of 10 cents per page.  Students may be charged 10 cents per page for printing materials from the computers.
   14. Students found to be cutting from the library will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.
   15. Students using library computers must sign a Technology Use Agreement and follow procedures for technology of the Public Schools of Edison Township.  Any individuals who violate the policy and procedures outlined in the agreement will be subject to disciplinary and/or legal action.  This includes warnings, parental notification, criminal prosecution, and monetary restitution.
   16. Misuse of computers will result in administrative discipline (NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF LIBRARY PRIVILEGES).
FIELD TRIPS / ASSEMBLIES
Field trips and assemblies which supplement or enrich the curriculum are a valuable aspect of the teaching learning process. All field trips shall be conducted in accordance with Board of Education Policy #6153.  All field trips must be approved by the superintendent or designee.
   * School rules and regulations shall apply while students are involved in a field trip or assembly.
   * Field trips and assemblies which relate to the curriculum offered during regular school hours may or may not be provided at no cost to students. However, such field trips and assemblies shall not constitute a course requirement, and written permission of parent/guardian is required for the participation of any student in a field trip. A completed medical form is required by parent/guardian for participation by any student in an overnight trip. When students 18 or older sign their own permission slip or medical form, parent/guardian shall be duly notified.
   * Field trips which are related to the co-curricular program (after school clubs/activities) and year-end trips shall not be funded by the board. Nonetheless, written permission of the parent/guardian is required for a student to participate in these field trips. A completed medical form is required by parent/guardian for participation by any student in an overnight trip.
   * Medication shall not be self-administered by a pupil on a field trip except for asthma or another potentially life-threatening illness as certified by the prescribing physician provided that the parent/guardian presents a written authorization for the administration of the medication to the Board of Education.
PUBLICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSMISSIONS
The Board of Education supports publications/transmissions as important elements of the instructional program. Individuals are encouraged to develop skills of written and verbal communication and to exercise the right to express their opinions freely and responsibly.
The rights of free speech, and free expression in public schools pursuant to the First Amendment, are not automatically coextensive with rights in other settings and shall be applied in light of the special characteristics of the school environment. The Board of Education reserves the right to exercise prepublication control over school-sponsored publications and audio/video/electronic transmission and reception through administrative staff and faculty and to limit interference with the school program.  Individuals shall have the right to appeal the exercise of censorship following the Board-approved procedures for appeals.
Expression may be restricted if it can be determined that such expression is inconsistent with the basic educational mission of the school district and when censorship action is reasonably related to legitimate educational concerns.
Individuals who violate this policy by expression, publication, distribution, transmission, or reception of any materials which are illegal, biased or prejudiced, vulgar or profane, inflammatory, unsuitable for immature audiences, libelous in nature, or which do not meet the school district’s high standards of learning and propriety consistent with its educational goals and objectives may be subject to appropriate discipline.
The goal in providing technological resources is to promote educational excellence by facilitating resource sharing, information, innovation and communication. This procedure includes, but is not limited to, the following categories of technology: school-based computer networks, district-wide computer networks, stand-alone computers, laptops, peripheral devices (DVD/VCR devices, televisions, telephones, scanners and printers), on-line services, licensed software, CD-ROM programs and DVD/video cassettes, confidential district databases and use of the Internet. The district reserves the right to prioritize and limit access to and use of its technological resources.
Acceptable use of technological resources in the Public Schools of Edison Township can be defined as employing technology as an educational tool. The purpose of the technological resources is to support research and education by providing access to unique resources and the opportunity for collaborative work.  Access must be in support of education and research and consistent with the education objectives of the Public School of Edison Township. Transmission of any material in violation of any United States or state regulation is prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, copyrighted material, threatening or obscene material, or material protected by trade secret. Use for commercial activities is not acceptable. Use for product advertisement or political lobbying is also prohibited.
The use of school technology and Internet access is a privilege, not a right, and inappropriate use will result in the suspension of privileges and disciplinary action consistent with district policy.  Any individual who uses the technological resources of the district consents to having all activities regarding this use monitored.
Individuals are expected to abide by the generally accepted rules of technology etiquette and safety.  This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
   1. Be polite. Do not get abusive in your messages to others.
   2. Use appropriate language. Do not swear, use vulgarities or any other inappropriate language.
Illegal activities are strictly forbidden.
   3. Do not reveal your personal address or phone numbers of students or colleagues.
   4. Note that electronic mail (Email) is not guaranteed to be private.  People who operate the system do have access to all mail. Messages relating to or in support of illegal activities may be reported to appropriate authorities.
   5. Do not use the technological resources in such a way that you would disrupt the use of the technological resources of other users.
   6. All communications and information accessible via technological resources should be assumed to be private property protected by copyright laws unless otherwise stated.




PUBLICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY TRANSMISSIONS (cont.)
        Individuals are responsible for good behavior when using school technological resources, and general school rules for behavior and communications apply. Teachers of younger students will guide them toward appropriate materials.
        Individual users of the district’s technology are expected to adhere to the following prohibitions. The list is not all inclusive but includes the major categories of misuse of technology.
   1. Damaging computers, computer systems or computer networks. This includes changing the configuration of an individual computer or network.
   2. Creating or installing a computer virus.
   3. Installing or using personal software on any computer in the district.
   4. Downloading software.
   5. Using the technology for any illegal activities.
   6. Gaining unauthorized access to any technological resource.
   7. Using another individual’s account or name.
   8. Vandalizing the account or data of another user.
   9. Using abusive, obscene language; sending hate mail or harassing others.
   10. Obtaining pornographic text, graphics or photographs.
   11. Sending or receiving material that is racist, sexist or offensive to the religious beliefs of people.
   12. Using technology for personal, financial or business gain.
   13. Email broadcasting.
   14. Revealing personal information about yourself or others.
Security of all technological resources is a high priority. If you feel you can identify a security problem, notify a teacher, librarian/media specialist or school administrator.  Do not demonstrate the problem to other users.  Any individual identified as a security risk or having a history of problems with other technological resources will be denied access to district technology.
All individuals who violate the policy and procedures for technology of the Public Schools of Edison Township, whether or not they have signed the Technology Use Agreement, will be subject to disciplinary action and/or legal action. This includes warnings, parental notification, criminal prosecution and monetary restitution.
The Public Schools of Edison Township makes no warranties of any kind, whether expressed or implied, for the service it is providing.  The Public Schools of Edison Township will not be responsible for any damages the user suffers. This includes loss of data resulting from delays, non-deliveries, mid-deliveries, or service interruptions caused by the user’s own negligence or errors or omissions.  Use of any information obtained via the Internet is at the user’s own risk. The Public Schools of Edison Township specifically denies any responsibility for the accuracy or quality of information obtained through its services.
SCHOOL SECURITY
Security officers and a police officer have been assigned to J. P. Stevens High School to assist students, faculty and administrators during the school day and at activities and athletic contests after school.  These security officers are members of the school staff.  Students must comply with the directions and instructions of these officers.
LOCKERS
Each student is assigned a hall locker for books and garments. Lockers are the property of the school, and students are responsible for the proper care and treatment of the locker assigned to them. Vandalism or damage to a locker will result in disciplinary action and payment of damages.
The hall locker and a combination lock are assigned at the opening of school by the homeroom teacher.  Students who transfer in after the opening of school will be assigned a locker at the time of registration through the Main Office. For your protection, students should not give out the combination and should always check to make sure that the door is locked. DO NOT SHARE LOCKERS.  DO NOT PRESET LOCKER COMBINATIONS.


SCHOOL – ASSIGNED LOCKS. 


Students shall be given one lock for their high school experience. If a lock is lost, the student must pay a $7.00 replacement fee. Students have the option of turning in the lock on the last day of classes to the homeroom teacher. The lock will be returned to the student in September. 
Students are assigned locks and lockers in Physical Education classes. To prevent theft, students must lock all valuables in a locker.  The school district is not responsible for stolen items.  
LOCKER THEFTS


Students must exercise great care to see that all lockers are properly secured to protect public and personal property from theft/vandalism. Never leave belongings unprotected. Thefts should be reported immediately. Every theft report will be carefully investigated by the administration. Complaints will be filed by the administration against any student possessing stolen property.  Reports of thefts should be made on the proper forms available in the Main Office. DO NOT SHARE LOCKERS AND DO NOT LEAVE THE LOCKER COMBINATION ON THE LAST SETTING WHICH ALLOWS ACCESS.  ALSO, MAKE SURE THE LOCKER IS CLOSED SECURELY AND LOCKED BY SPINNING THE DIAL AND CHECKING THE LATCH.
LOST AND FOUND
Students who find lost or misplaced items should turn them in to the Attendance Office. Larger items will be held in a bin in the Attendance Office, smaller items will be forwarded to the Main Office secretaries.
SEARCH AND SEIZURE
School lockers remain the property of the district even when used by pupils. Lockers are provided solely for the storage of clothing, school materials, and other personal property required in the normal course of the school day. Lockers are subject to administrative search in the interests of school safety, sanitation, discipline, enforcement of school regulations and to search by law enforcement officials on presentation of a proper warrant. 
A pupil’s person and possessions may be searched by a school official provided that the official has reasonable ground to suspect that the search will turn up evidence that the pupil has violated or is violating either the law or the rules of the school. Under no circumstances shall a search be conducted based solely upon an anonymous tip and/or a rumor that contraband is present. The extent or scope of the search shall be reasonably related to the objectives of the search and not excessively intrusive in light of the age and sex of the pupil and the nature of the infraction. A physical search may only be conducted by a staff member of the same sex as the pupil. Before instituting such a search, except in cases of emergency, the principal or designee shall try to inform the parents/guardians and request their presence.
Searches (for controlled dangerous substances/drug paraphernalia/alcohol/firearms/weapons) conducted by staff when there is suspicion that the laws and policies for safe and drug-free schools are being violated shall be based on the reasonable grounds required by this policy. When law enforcement officials conduct the search, the more stringent grounds required by law must be applied.  BOE Policy 5145.12.
STUDY HALLS
Study halls are designed to provide a quiet, controlled environment in which students can read or work on assignments. All students are encouraged to use this time wisely and to follow the rules, regulations and procedures established for study halls. Students may also visit the library during their study hall period and are required to make appropriate use of the library, remain there for the entire period, and follow the library rules during their visit.
In addition, study hall time may be used for other reasons with permission from the teacher and according to the rules and regulations established for use of study hall time. Some of the activities that occur during study hall include, but are not limited to, peer tutoring, make-up work, pre-arranged appointment (e.g. vocal/instrumental lessons, nurse, school counseling, administration, CST, etc.). Students may also seek assignment to work in the offices (nurse, attendance, main, library, school counseling, etc.). Student Council Officers may also be reassigned to the Student Council Office.
   1. Study hall will be conducted the same as a class with a relaxed and quiet atmosphere conducive to study.
   2. Students must arrive on time and attend every day. Tardiness and cutting will result in disciplinary action.
   3. SEATS WILL BE ASSIGNED by the teacher in charge. This is designed to assist with attendance and to help maintain the proper atmosphere. Should vandalism occur, the person assigned that specific seat will be held accountable.
   4. Any vandalism to a student’s assigned seat should be reported to the teacher in charge.
   5. Procedures for obtaining passes will be explained by the study hall teacher and will be in accordance with the guidelines established for Hall Passes. Students will not be excused from study hall unless it is an emergency, or they have a previously scheduled appointment.
   6. All students are responsible for keeping the study hall neat and clean.
   7. All students must follow the reasonable requests and directives of any staff member.
   8. Failure to comply with the study hall rules will result in disciplinary action.
SCHOOL INSURANCE
The Board of Education provides student insurance during the school day for all students. However, students have the option of participating in an additional insurance plan on a voluntary basis. During homeroom on opening day, students are given the envelopes which explain the available plans and the cost.  
Students participating in sports or opting for the voluntary plan would be able to file a claim form in the event an injury occurred. The filing of an accident/injury report must always be done through the Nurse’s office.  Information regarding the claim forms would be available at that time.
STUDENT RESPONSIBILITY FOR ISSUED MATERIALS – FINES
Books, locks, materials, equipment, etc., issued to students are to be returned to the teacher who issued those articles.  FINES WILL BE ASSESSED TO STUDENTS NOT RETURNING ISSUED MATERIALS.  A fine slip will be given to the students by the teacher (or sent through homeroom). Fines are paid in the Main Office.
STUDENTS WITH OUTSTANDING FINES WILL NOT RECEIVE A REPORT CARD AND CANNOT PARTICIPATE IN CO-CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES/EVENTS. GRADUATING SENIORS WILL NOT BE PERMITTED TO PARTICIPATE IN THE GRADUATION CEREMONIES UNTIL FINES ARE CLEARED.
STUDENT USE OF THE TELEPHONE
If a student does need to use a phone, it must be an emergency. Teachers may send the student to the Attendance Office; only the principal or assistant principal may give permission to use the phone. Students may not use their cell phones for any reason during the school day. FAILURE TO FOLLOW THESE PROCEDURES WILL RESULT IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION. (see section entitled “Discipline”)
MILITARY RECRUITMENT – OPT OUT
Federal education legislation requires all high schools to provide military recruiters and secondary education institutions with the names, addresses and phone numbers of all 11th and 12th grade students.  Parents and adult students have the option of deciding if their child’s information is to be released to military recruiters. The form is available in the JPS Main Office and Counseling Office.
In the fall, parents of all 11th and 12th grade students will be surveyed to indicate if they do or do not want their child’s information released to military recruiters. The school district will release directory information to military recruiters upon the consent of parents.